Vigyan Bhairav Tantra (Technique: 035 of 112) explained by Osho

Shiva Replied:  
   35. At the edge of a deep well look steadily into its depths until — the wondrousness.
---------------------------------------------------------------

The techniques are similar, with a slight difference. AT THE EDGE OF A DEEP WELL LOOK STEADILY INTO ITS DEPTHS UNTIL — THE WONDROUSNESS. Look into a deep well. The well will be reflected in you. Forget thinking completely; stop thinking completely. Just go on looking into the depth. Now they say mind has its own depth, like a well. Now in the West, they are developing depth psychology. They say mind is not just a surface. It is just a beginning; there are depths — many depths, hidden depths.

Look into a well without thinking. The depth will be reflected in you, the well will become just an outer symbol of the inner depth. And go on looking UNTIL – THE WONDROUSNESS, until you feel wonder-filled.

Do not stop before this moment. Go on looking, go on looking, go on looking, day after day, month after month. Just go to a well, look deep, with no thoughts moving in the mind. Just meditate. Just meditate on the depth: meditate the depth, become one with it. Go on meditating; one day your thoughts will not be there. Any moment it can happen. Suddenly you will feel you have the same well within you, the same depth. And then a strange, very strange feeling will come to you: you will feel wonder-filled.

Chuang Tzu was passing over a bridge with his master, Lao Tsu. Lao Tsu is reported to have said to Chuang Tzu, “Remain here. Go on looking down from this bridge to the river until the river stops and the bridge starts flowing. Then come to me.” The river is flowing; the bridge never flows. But Chuang Tzu was given this meditation – to wait on this bridge. It is said he made a hut on the bridge and remained there. Months passed… he would just sit on the bridge, looking down for the moment when the river would stop and the bridge would flow. Then he would go to the master.

One day it happened: the river stopped and the bridge started flowing. How can it happen? If thought stops completely, then anything is possible, because really, it is fixedness of thought which says that the river is flowing and the bridge is static. This is just relative – just relative!

Einstein says, and physics says, that everything is relative. You are traveling in a train, a fast train. What happens? The trees flow by, they run by. And if the train is really smooth and you do not feel that the train is running, you are just looking through the windows, the trees are moving, not the train.

Einstein has said that if in space two trains are running, or two spaceships are running side by side with the same speed, you will not be able to feel that they are moving. You can feel a moving train because you see the static things by the side. If there is nothing – for example, if the trees are also moving in the same direction with the same speed – you will feel static. Or when a train passes in the opposite direction, your speed is doubled. You feel your train has become faster.

It has not become faster. It is the same train with the same speed, but a train going in the opposite direction gives you the feeling of double speed. If speed is relative, then it is just a fixedness of the mind to think that the river is flowing and the bridge is static.

Continuously meditating, meditating, meditating, Chuang Tzu came to realize that everything is relative. The river is flowing because you take the bridge as static. The bridge is also flowing deep down. Nothing is static in this world. Atoms are moving, electrons are moving; the bridge is a constant movement within. Everything is flowing; the bridge is also flowing.

Chuang Tzu must have had a glimpse of the atomic structure of the bridge. Now they say this wall which looks static is not static. Movement is there, every electron is running, but the movement is so fast you cannot see it. That is why you feel it as static.

If this fan goes on with a faster movement, faster and faster, you will not be able to see its wings, the spaces between them. You will not be able to see this. And if it moves with the speed of light, you will see simply one circular disc that is static. Nothing will be moving in it because eyes cannot catch that fast movement.

So Chuang Tzu must have had a glimpse of the atomic structure of the bridge. He waited and waited, and the fixed mind dissolved. Then he saw that the bridge was flowing – and the movement was so fast that the river was just static in comparison to it. He came running to Lao Tsu and Lao Tsu said, “Okay! Now do not ask me. The thing has happened to you.” What had happened? No-mind had happened.

In this technique, AT THE EDGE OF A DEEP WELL LOOK STEADILY INTO ITS DEPTH UNTIL – THE WONDROUSNESS. When you feel wonder-filled, when the mystery descends upon you, when mind is no more but simply mystery – a milieu of mystery — then you will be capable of knowing yourself.
