Introduction by sadhguru: https://youtube.com/shorts/FgBjInkwopA?feature=share

This text file is composed by: {
   - 1 - Pure seiva Understandings and experiences of life to better describe how to practice the sutras (some understandings may come from himself, osho, nithyananda etc. whatever the source, it is written from the pount of view of Seiva)
   - 2 - Nithyananda video transcriptions (text copied from the videos without any editing)
   - 3 - Osho video transcriptions (text copied from the videos without any editing)
   - 4 - Nithyananda key words of each sutra (composed and filtered by Seiva to best and quick understandingbof the sutra before each practice session
   - 5 - Osho key words of each sutra (composed and filtered by Seiva to best and quick understandingbof the sutra before each practice session
   - 6 - If you want to lay eggs around the world, writting each sutra around where you live, where would you place these reminders? Where would we right this numbers of these sutras in front of our eyes for everyday rememberance? > 
}

NOTE: > From 64 Shiva Sutras, one sutra lists 112 Meditation Techniques (112 Dharanas)

NOTE: Nithyananda says: "The message of the Shiva Sutras is: You are Divinity!"

Seiva sobre liberation/liberdade/mukti/aghora: Quando alguém te contradizer quando afirmas que poucas pessoas sao independentes incluindonessas peara quem falas. Prova-lhes que não sao independentes e que não atinjiram mukti... puxa do vomito e vê se elas vão atras de ti... se forem atras de ti, não estao em mukti

NOTE: VBT intro: By going fiercely into each technique, applying your energy there, then you are starting the destruction process. Destruction is needed to create something new. Shiva is the destroyer... Nithyananda sais renunciation is needed only for the things you don't have. Do not renouce the things you have, only the things you don't have... If you go deep in each technique renoucing and destroying the inner chattering about the things you don't have, then you are shiva. - Seiva
NOTE: VBT intro: Shiva Sutras are not filosophies, because philosophy does not give solutions, it only mentions problems and questions.
NOTE: VBT intro (about the intelect): According to Seiva, a person who lives without finding her/his center and instead lives only with intelect, will always be unfulfilled because possibilities for the intelect are too many. Notice that Shiva did not answer Devi intelectually, he does not answer to her questions, instead he goes around and give a technique for her to experience the answer. The same way I cannot make my mother's stomach digest food, I cannot answer experiencial questions, What I can do is to give a method that leads to such experiencei (Osho also mentions this). In this next video of Paramahansa Yogananda, he tells a story of GOD answering to a person (seiva also adds, the person is intelectual and GOD is answering intelectual like brahama. There is also a movie from Hollywood where it is actually satan who creates this mess that GOD of Yogananda is describing. The holliwood video is called "Bedazzled"  and the actor is Brendan Frasere
NOTE: VBT intro: Auspiciousness is the quality you can aquire that is responsible for you to feel Grace (also called Karona) because whatever happens without cause (causeless auspiciousness) is great, like the wind and unespectedly blows against your face without motive, without cause.
NOTE: VBT intro (comparing Jesus to Ganapati): you cannot get better than the combination of Omnipresence+Omnipotence+Omniscience, therefore, Around shiva there was Ganas, his friends... if Shiva is the combination of the 3 Omnis because all three start from their 0D, what we and the ganas can do, is to join his "club"... We cannot worship Shiva because it does not exist, we can only become that. Shivoham mantra means "I am Shiva"... So the Ganas are a group of being already becoming like shiva or already eradiating the Shiva Consciousness. The brightest of the Ganas was known as Ganapati and his name was Ganesh... Who ever understands Ganesh, understands Shiva Inteligence, therefore one this he is known for is Obstacle remover... Another person whom we could call Gana (According to Seiva D'Arve) was Jesus, because he was radiating Consciousness (the divine father principle) and that is why he replied to those who asked the question "Can we see your father?" with the answer "If you see me, you see the father"... The same way, if you understand the Ganas meaning (which is the club around the 3 omnis) understands that it is impossible to be higher than Shiva, it is only possible to join the club.... Who ever tried to be Higher than Shiva only failed like for example Lucifer... Lucifer wanted to be better than the omni, that is why he was kept inside duality by himself... remember thar higher does not exist without the lower and vice versa... :: Regra de 3 simples: Os ganas estao para Shiva assim como Jesus está para o Pai... como Jesus era nequela sociedade o unico filho de Deus, o unico caminho com verdade e vida, ele era naquela epoca para os Judeus o maior Gana, ele era o "Ganapati" daquele sitio. :: Resumindo, Jesus e Ganesh estavam nas mesmas circunstancias na vida... Jesus era a maior representacao de Deus naquele pais. Ganeshe era a maipr representacao de Shiva naquele grupo de ganas. :: 
NOTE: VBT intro (Was 'Shiva' his name?): nao dá para dar um nome ao yogi Shiva, se fosse possivel dar-lhe um nome significava que ele ja nao tinha todas aquelas qualidades
NOTE: VBT intro: Yaksha Swaroopa maening: Yaksha: Aparicao; Swaroopa: is the form or image of the ecstasy of the Creator.
NOTE: VBT intro (about ganga): According to Seiva, it is said that in himalayas every mountain peak is Shiva (read directly from the source: https://isha.sadhguru.org/mahashivratri/shiva/shiva-ganga/). Not just because Shiva sits on the peak of awareness but also because it is on top of the mountains that the rivers start to flow... So shiva wears the ganga on his head, not only because he sit on the peak of conscousness but also because he sit unmoving like a moutain. Some yogis like Sadhguru also mentions the quality of the whater of Ganga that is of such nutricional value that by drinking one stomack full of this water, gives you energy of one full day without food, and this does not happen anywhere else... There is more to it...
NOTE: VBT intro (Names of shiva): "Asudosha: Easily pleased (meaning that you don't need much to please him)" :: Maha Deva: The greates GOD of the GODs
NOTE: VBT intro (all symbols): The Moon Crescent – Ardha-Chandrama; Body smeared with ashes; Matted Hair / Jata; The Ganga; The Third Eye; Half Open Eyes; The Snake Around the Neck; Tripunda (on the forehead); Tiger Skin; The Rudraksha Necklace; Damaru, the Drum; Trishul; Kamandalu; Kundalas (male ear ring and female ear ring); Mount Kailash; Nandi, the Bull. (one possible source: https://vedicfeed.com/meaning-behind-symbols-of-lord-shiva/). (one possible source: https://vedicfeed.com/meaning-behind-symbols-of-lord-shiva/).
NOTE: Shiva Sutras connect us with the three aspects of Shiva within us: Satyam (the truth), Shivam (the goodness), Sundaram (the beauty). If Satyam is not permanent it is not truth, it does not center the weel of the universe :: Yoga: Juntar o util ao agradavel eternamente.
NOTE: Sound of bansuri in Nithyananda Videos: Pleasing the Lord - Shivranjani (feat. Rakesh Chaurasia) - Pandit Hariprasad Chaurasia
NOTE: About "Soma Rasa": Deus deu-nos um passeio de 80 anos, Jorge Luis Borges (escritor argentino) says: Every path in life leads you to death, loose yourself!
Note: Only if you can die after each task you do (live living life fully during yhe execution of it) then you can be auspicious. Because if the next event is worse that this one, how can you say that this next event is great? when the next event is week, you can only honestly say it is great if what has passed was already lived fully and you know it is past. 
NOTE: There is no Religion Higher Than Truth
uDev: Descobrir qual foi o Sutra com o Qual o Rei Janaka se iluminou (nao esquecer que o foco que ele ganhou com uma perna no ar e com uma perna no cavalo elé semelhante a ganhar foco entre o ponto A e o ponto B, esquecendo A e B... Da mesma forma quando olhamos para o ceu estrelado, quando encontramos 2 estrelas, conseguimos olhar fixamente para um ponto a meio dessas duas estrelas fixamente esquecendo as duas estrelas? conseguimos fazer como os telescopios modernos que fazem fotos de longa exposicao em sitios onde aparentemente nao havia nada? É que com os telescopios modernos quando fazemos fotos de longa exposicao entre 2 estrelas (esquecendo ambas) temos ao fim de algum tempo a reduzida luz a entrar na lente do telescopio e a format imagens que as vezes revelam constelacoes inteiras naquele sitio que aparentemente nao tinha nada

-1- Seiva Descriptions {
   SS #1: if I am not mistaken, this is the esence of the shambavi maha mudra kryia... this technique must be done slooooowly like the sun moving slowly, like dawn

   SS #2: It is a sutra tha will manifest when you drop your identity if is fully social. So in order for best practice I suggest taking a small trip the the woods in the morning when the atmosphere ia little colder than the body and little unconfortable, and in such place, empty of social distractions and demanding of you to evaporate your temperature, drop all of your clothes and relax! If somebody appraches the place, if you feel these woods are not governamental place you somebody else propriety, you don't even have to feel afraid of your security, relax and meet them this way

   SS #3: Nao tenho a certeza disto, mas acho que a tecnica do sadhguru de entoar muito subitamente a palavra "Shambo" que é constantemente entoada por ele e que tambem foi usado pela viji para atinhir mahasamadhi, foi esta tecnica, pelo que eu percebo, ambas as pontas do folego podem ser mais redondas ou mais bicudas, e esta tecnica deixa-nos aperceber dessas curvas do folego como se ambas fossem bicudas. Se as curvas do folego forem bicudas, vai haver o abrandamento (esvaziamento ou enchimento) da respiracao num instante anterior á explosão que é a nova respiracao (enchimento ou esvaziamento). Ou seja, se em ambas as curvas da respiracao tu fizeres dessas curvas mais bicudas do que mais suaves, vais ter o pico onde o 'acabar de esvaziar suave' dá um salto quantico para para o 'começar a encher explosivo' (ou do acabar de encher suave para o inicio do esvaziar explosivo)

   SS #4: Shiva Sutra responsavel pelo meu bufo alvarius "when it is all out and stops by itself" "dificult only if you thinks it is dificult because it is not". I had a dream where I was jumping around in a ceramic floored garden with waterfalls and in one of my jumps on the starcase, I was slow looking at the step below and could not find the ground and started falling in sky diving mode. In this dive, My eyes started looking correctly to the ground and calculating the impact time. During the fall I felt the adrenaline of falling and therefore my breath was all out. Due to the fact I was not calculating a slow stop at the ground, I kept screaming and my breath was all out until the colision. then I hit the ground and woke up. This dream due to the fall adrenaline, became a lucid dream." In bufo... my energy/prana was all out right before finding my face. when, in my hand movements searching for the face the hands found themselves without finding the face. The orgasm of the universe happened. The face was not found by the hands but the hands colided. So, to practice this sutra, in the breath cicle divided by 4 (in, pause, out, pause) find the breath when it is all out at the same time you CONTINUOUSLY imagine yourself already there. To help, imagine yourself eternaly falling (because the vibration of the air movement in your nostrils is one of your subconcient tools to keep time for you) and in this eternal falling it is already the universal pause. The sensation of this falling is the same sensation of the breath going out without the curve upwards. Fell eternaly the sensation of only the breath out without the pause because everything else except the outgoing breath is the pause. If you ignore the upward breeath, your small self vanishes (because matter can only be ciclical and you are removing the other half of the breatbecause everything else except the outgoing breath is the pause. If you ignore the upward breeath, your small self vanishes (because matter can only be ciclical and you are removing the other half of the breathbecause everything else except the outgoing breath is the pause. If you ignore the upward breeath, your small self vanishes (because matter can only be ciclical and you are removing the other half of the breatbecause everything else except the outgoing breath is the pause. If you ignore the upward breeath, your small self vanishes (because matter can only be ciclical and you are removing the other half of the breatbecause everything else except the outgoing breath is the pause. If you ignore the upward breeath, your small self vanishes (because matter can only be ciclical and you are removing the other half of the breatbecause everything else except the outgoing breath is the pause. If you ignore the upward breeath, your small self vanishes (because matter can only be ciclical and you are removing the other half of the breath). Again: Step 1 - take a look at the drawing where the breath is divided in 4 aspects (inward, curve down, outward, curve up). Step 2 - If you think you have to find the pause in the turning point, it seems dificult. Therefore, if enlightenment is already there and is already your inner space, then something must be continuous without cicles. Step 3: Dissect the sensation you have of the air movement and the body feelings when the breath is going out before slowing down. The part of the out-going breath that is fast going down/out is what we need. Step 4 - Feel that sensation/notive that sensation constantly as if you could only breath out. Step 5 - each time out going breath happens, add energy to your vision of falling down, relaxing. Step 6 - Allow yourlself to forget the incoming breath, that is the only way your small self is able to vanish. The universal pause will happen this way because the inward breath will not be there, that itself is an absence, a pause!. \n\n In my bufo alvarius this was what was happening to me because I could not feel my self but could feel an eternal flow of energy. I felt the will to play and shout because there "was nobody there ouside of me, the room felt inexistent" and my energy was spread outside of my skin. Shiva says "when breath is all out (up)", so, when you exale relax into your centar (spine stight, sitting for exaple) and this way, if you get yourself imagining a free fall, the air is moving upwards only, therefor he says "when breath is all out (up)". \n\n One more thing. when practicing this tecknique, focus on the breath turn which is more convenient to you. The most convinient is the one breath that takes longer to slow down before starting turning in the opposite direction because it can be used by you to find your relaxation. Keep relaxing into your chair continuously and imagining the 2 paralell lines downwards, the eternal fall/out-breath plus the segment of out-breath that is extracted from the other 3 parts of the breath cicle. This one segment is what you must use as imagination to feel your longer eternal breath. Every sensation and vibration of the body is suposed to be felt as the air slaping on your face when falling in sky dive. \n\n In my bufo, there was a part where my hands kept tracking the face and found themselves. When they found themselves in the air above my head (I was lying down) They kept pressing on each other as is is was not the end of their movement. Of course, If my involuntary intention was to keep moving the hands, the phisically stoped by themselves because I commanded nothing, they colided alone. \n\n Also in my bufo, there I remember that when I smoked I knew I don't even know how long this experience could happen, I was aware that I did not knew when it would end. :: Another thing... would it be correct if in this sutra we would have to use our entire lung capacity in each breath?

   SS #11: In my imature experience, stopping the doors of the senses means: not to be rigid while perceiving the ant in the arm, instead, feel the ant as if it is in the center of your experience, in the center of your universe, because if that happens, you feel the energy (bhairav) but not the location of the creeping

   SS #13: If you notice, the peacock has many fake eyes in it's tail... each eye has the five coloured cicles mentioned in the sutra :: I gess the way to experience this sutra is to stare at something with eyes wide open... it you do so.... the colors of what you are staring at will start to dye out from the center to the circumference (I used to confuse this sutra with the 78 yhat talks about atention that alights. :: This sutra is probably the one that was used by Sadhguru unconsciously when he was young and was staring at an ant, at a leaf or at any dot for hours... he would also be staring at darkness, and that would be another sutra (sutra 77) :: This is probably the sutra where people stare at a candel's light steadily :: I guess this experience was one that I gelf when I used salvia nd mushrooms, where looking at a fixed bright point across the window, the multitude of reflections of the universe opened up and for that, my eyes hed to close and twist a little jist like shiva eyes :: If this sutra is what re-creates my combined experience of salvia+mushrooms, then trully you can see the whole peacock tail all around you just like my trip experience. I was able to see all 360 degrees around me a net of eyes just like the cover of the book "DMT" from the author Rick Straussman

   SS #14: Technique to use when yoy are in yhe bed trying to sleep but you are restless constantly moving without stopping, always unconfortable in each pisition... if yhat is the case you are at rest in some part of the body and without rest at some other part of the body... in yhat case, lock yourself lock your muscles in such a way that you rest in a tense form, you may be ywisted in the body, yor back may even be arched back or twisted some way, but you can find that assymetric looking pisition like a sheet of metal that gets crooked by either too hot water or too cold water.... the sheet of metal bends, this bending is the middle tentions betwwen the two temperatures... so when you are in the bed, decide to rest and in that rest you will find the urge to move to the second full rested position, start the movement to the second position but stop in the middle, stop in the middle of the two restfull pisitions and the only way to do that is by finding a certain disconfort... you know that you have found this sutra when the unconfortable position which is in the middle of the 2 restfull positions expend for each and every muscle of the body... if your whole body muscles contrubute to this positions, you will find yourself locked in the middle of the bhairava (the energy), in the middle of the two rest positions. At this point, dharana is the method described to find this midlle position. To find and ininterruptedly experience this full body tension in between two restfull positions, and the the energy you are putting out will be consumed until samadhi.... until ko energy is no more there, and you will find not  2 restfull positions + 1 restless positions, but 3 restfull positions.... samadhi; Is it possble that bharatanatyam dance would be good to practice this??

   SS #15 {

      Explanation from Nithyananda why some enlightned masters sever limbs of their disciples to get them enlightened:
         (he gives the meaning of tapas): - Tapas: Ready to work on the technique at any cost, any risk
                                          - Therefore this technique is only for those whom enlightenment becomes FIRST priority
                                          - Also there is a certain relationship between master and disciple that is so genuine that this method works
                                          - This technique only works when a certain relationship between master and disciple is there.

      A very good explanation of Maya is found in the video where Nithyananda explains this sutra
         (video: "Just Fall In - Shiva Sutras in Nithyananda Videos"; URL: https://youtu.be/Gkp2p7JVLB)
   }

   SS #25: Seiva created a script to ring a bell randomly at any time within 24 hours, and the person who is aware of the script/program, will stop as soon as the bell is rang. So, after this, there is a question... what to do if you stop and then you have the inpulse again of continuing your life and do something? Well, we must undertand that this sutra is a technique and is meant for you to be aware if the stopping, it is not for you to become lazy... therefore you definitly will continue with your life at some point. If life is really flowing and if at some point you feel yhat your life is goung to continue, than keep up the game of the shiva sutras (as per SS #110: "Gracious one, play...") and the script will suggest the sutra #108 to you the player where, before you continue to run your life, first you see where the flow of life is trying to pull you thowards

   SS #27: Maybe this is the origin of the Dance "Shiva Tandava"

   SS #28: My girlfriend is incapable of saying portuguese curse worfs like "cagalhão, fuck, hore, shit" etc... And I keep her in this zone where I spell each silable of each word and slowly, very slowly she joins each silable and pieces the deprivation I put her into. She says the first silable of a curse word and I wait for it to create a certain feeling in her mind... then I do the next for the next silable... The moment each silable of the word gains a new meaning, now, we join the together

   SS #29: Do you feel stuck somewhere or wuth something? devote yourself to the process, are you in jain? devote yourself to the process, devotions frees. Sadhguru sais in Inner Engeneer ans in Shambavi: "All the rules are my rules". Devotion may make you feel smaller, seeing everything bugger that you, in case your handcuffs start increasing in size where you are smaller and smaller, suddenly they may loose grip or your hands ang you may escape. God is definitly bigger, right?

   SS #30: This is probably the sutra I use to notice the sensation of each emotion very intensly and keep being with it until it is all burnt and finished. When I want to be a serial killer, such emotion I do express as being a serial killer but with a box sac

   SS #34: I was shocked when I was helping the yearly party of my village as staff, when a litle girl to whom I did not know, sat on my lap playfully because there was no more seats, and asked me to make my leg jump like a horse... I was shocked because she was inocent and I did not know who's parent is this girl, I was 31 years of age and this image remained in my mind for a few years... this shock, these open eyes, I guess it is the lesson of this shiva sutra... I just went for a few days comtemplating of being like here, being true with other people without holding on hipotesis and play with people trully playfully

   SS #35: In one sentence what I would say is: "Notice depth... either if it is a well of if it is masters's eyes"

   SS #35: Jusy as Lao Tzu taught his disciple: stay on this bridge and do not go out until river stops and bridgr moves.. At that moment you know the yin yang... but further continuing, go on changing your prespective from yin to yang, from yang to yin, from yin to yang until you see the snake wich is sushumna... the edge of the bridge will not be a straight line if you keep changing you eyes from yin to yang, yang to yin... your eyes will like you are drunk. Bridge moving + river sptoped = Ida. Bridge flowing + River moving = Pingala. The edge that separates both can be a fixed surface or a wave form, that is sushumna

   SS #38: From nithyananda videos (for example: Silence Within || Part 2 || Shiva Sutras || 25 May 2007 (https://youtu.be/Id8EqNKoOKI)) we can understan why shiva wears the ganga in his head... it is because soud is eternal and shiva in in the center of it. BATHE IN THE CENTER OF SOUND, because at each moment sound exists.
   
   SS #38: This is one of those techniques you can practice EVERY where, even in the market place
   
   SS #40: The expression of slowly singing this bajhan in the beggining (https://youtu.be/i7B4SspgC0w) shows the bliss in her face. A bajhan is an oportunity to use the music to refine our voice pitches

   SS #42: The best sound I know for this, is the bansuri sound that Nithyananda has at the end of his videos

   SS #44: The origin of the zen koan: Find out the sound of one hand clapping

   SS #47: Nithyananda says you can use your spiritual name if it has been given to you by an enlightened being, you can use your GOD's name (in my case, krishna or Shiva or shambo) or your Guru's name (in my case, one of my gurus whose name gave me once a profound experience just by uttering the name, is Ayahuasca... A-ya-ua-sssssss-ca!)

   SS #58: Este sutra e o responsavel por eu em pequenino questionar a existencia das coisas que existiam à minha volta e questionar a minha propria experiencia porque eu qjeria muito saber de que forma é que deus olha paras os justos e para os pecadores. por causa de eu tentar ver o ponto de vista de deus, olhava para a minha existencia como uma possibilidade de ser um teste e nada maia exiatir do que eu e o holograma a minha volta... tornei me mau com aa pessoas a minha volta incluindo com a minha mae... e um certo dia eu estava mais uma vez a querer ser mau com a minha mae e quase para lhe responder: Tu cala-te porque tu nem existes... Da mesma forma o meu professor de fisico-quimica falou de um cientista no passado que quesrionou tudo na vida incluindo ele proprio e eu respondi "Uau que obvio, isso ate eu ja o fiz".

   SS #63: This is the sutra where I can say "My cat, my guru" because my cat called Buakaw (like the muay thai fighter) climbed on my leg while I was meditating and I relaxed my naked leg to the cats claws.... and pretending the cat was ME, Something in my being swaped and I became the cat's fur. This was with the greay cat to whome I gave paliative care..... I think this is what Alan Watts talks about "thr sindrome of the holy man" where a person ser all events around himself as if he is doing it all. As if he is GOD. To try it, when listening to somebody's voice, listen as if is is you who are talking and a sincronicity will be such that you cannot distinguish if it is you or not

   SS #66: This sutra makes you go beyond memory. Sadhguru when talking about karma says "...This is my body, why? Because of genetics and because of memory.... if there is memory, I perceive you as my friend, if there is no memory, now I perceive you as a stranger. Memory is a great possibility, without it we would be nothing, and also it is a boundary" (video: https://youtu.be/vLEUBfNf08Q; name: "It’s Your Karma That You Have To Endure Me! | Guru | Occult | Mysticism | Sadhguru | Adiyogi") :: Este sutra é responsavel por uma terapia que se usa em Portugal e que se chama "Constelacoes". Nessa terapia faz-se teatro em que imaginamos que os nossos amigos estao a fazer o papel das pessoas que nos magiaram e a essas pessoas depois podemos reagir como queriamos reagir na altura dos nossos traumas.

   SS #67: Sometime I ask a question (any kind of question) to a person who is learning a skill, and because such person is learning a skill I ask a question to know if the person gets not only the correct answer but also the shortest with more details. These Shiva Sutras are great answering questions because each word uttered by shiva has a meaning, nothing was left for chance (don't forget that these shiva sutras answer the queations but not with words or intelect, but by making you do something, like beeing aware). When I ask a question to Indratena for example (a friend of mine getting her driving lessons) I remember asking her what the clutch peddal do. She starts answering the answer but not it the priper way, she goes on without focus, like if her mind is not cristal clear, she goes on talking of so many things AROUND the topic like "my friend hits the clutch pedal this way or that way every monday morning". When she starts talking about something else I did not ask, I ask the exact same question again like "Ok, but that is on mondays, what do you what to do every day with the clutch pedal?". This way, I go on and on, either polishing her answers or giving the yoga out of it. What is that one thing that does not include only the monday? Isn't it the "weak"? ("acronomo" is the word in portuguese that describes a name that includes many other names in it's definition. Weak includes 7 day names from Monday to Sunday, so I have to give Indratena the yoga/acronimo out of it to swallow all her options of intelectually running away from the answer I want her to give me. If she says that hitting the clutch on monday is different than Tuesday, then something about the answer is not about cars or vehicles, and by repeating the question, the mind gets focus. So, whenever I am able to give all correct acronimos to all her mental attempts to escape the answer, by repeating the question she gets a cristal clear answer for herself (because she knows she is being tested and if feels like a game, a small pleasent challenge (because my tone of voice is questioning to help, not to repress). All those times I repeat the question she gives a diferent answer, always diferent bits of answers, all bits correct, all bits of answer correspinding to one full question of mine (that sometimes have to be a longer queztion to include acronimos for her attempts tonescape) and in the end. All bits of answers she gives, are merged in the last question in one simple, undersfandable, explicit, answer with all the details. My job is to go questuoning the order of her words to match the answer about what the clutch does. So, this sutra shows something fascinating, it shows the algorithm of life like in a rubuks cube. Indratena is experiencing the full algorithm corresponding to the answer, if she keeps rotating the rubiks cube face, the cube (which is solved) gets mixed and in the end solves itself again. Indratena can experince ignorance in life and by rotating thtough the same question, goes to enlightnenment. If after enlightnement (where questions are not needed anymore) if you go again asking questions, ignorance comes again. Example of 1 question for 5 bits of answer: Q: How many numbers does 12345 has? A: It has 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 12, 23, 45, 123, 234, ... , 2345, more combinations and it is only one number 12345 (12 thousand, 345 units). To answer this question about numbers, many many combinations of the same 5 digit sequence can be said, if you attempt to answer all the combinations to annoy the person who is questioning, hopefully you will get bored and come back to your center, to your serious and focused posture. If you are being tested, the more combinations you say, the best we can see if you master the topic or not. If you are tested to be quick in you answer, we can see your clarity about the topic.  :: Computer software use this sutra all the time. When new hardware is built, we get new users, then those new users get the brilliant idea to improve it in creative ways, then because of that, new hardware, the old is forgotten, then sometimes flaws are found and new hardware is built based on the old. By observing any piece of equipment and by using it, you can improve it to the next Step, where "step" is the right word because today all software is built on top of previous software :: Don't be afraid to make mistakes in life, they will give you new data to include in your software. The only thing you need to do is not to forget the happenings, the happenings must also touch the core of your being like a slice of pizza, good memories touch your your memory forever (because they touch your center), so allow bad moments to also touch your center and be with you forever, otherwise yoy repeat the same mistakes. Everything that is not held to you at your center, floats around you eternally creating unpredictability of contact with you. For example, if you do not learn one mistake (not touching your center forever) it may repeat, may not repeat, may repear partially, may not repeat partially.

   SS #83: This sutra was used by mistake/coincidence by Ekart Tolle, he was a trully depressed being and one day he said to himself "I cannot live with myself anymore" And that made him think constantly who is the person to whom he cannot live with

   SS #89: There is a quality in you that happens in all the states of conciousness (which are the things shiva mentions in the sutra to include). This quality is mutual to all the tree states. what is that? If you contemplate on that and realise the answer to that, then that is it, you found the thread that includes all the states (waking, dreaming, sleeping)
   
   SS #71: Nithyananda in the video (listed by Seiva as: '> Part 3: Name: 'Light' As Life Energy; Link: https://youtu.be/oKY8f_PleA4') it is mentioned a certain shock that also happens in the life of Jesus. There is a story in the bible where Jesus in among a huge crowd and a woman who truly wants to visit the master gets inside the crowd. In the middle of such confusion she is able to touch his clothes. The entire crowd was walking along Jesus and feels such energy discharge happening and sais "STOP! Who just touched me?". The crowd was confused about the question and said "many people just touched you, what do you mean??" And the story goes on. The lady was truly wanting to meet the master and the master noticed the shock

   SS #72: Seiva Sais: I don't know if this sutra is sutable for what sadhguru says os not. BUT... If the sutra mentions the living presence of the cosmos, then I think this sutra is sutable for the question to sadhguru about what to do with mountain sized karmas. He's answer about huge amounts of karma was: " -Even if you himalayan size karma, inverse the equation and use this complexity.... instead of passion thowards you and dispassion toward other, no..... total passion about everything else (every other life), total dispassion about this one (refering to ourself)" - Video: With sadhguru in challenging times - day22 Apr"" 

   SS #72: Me, David Santos Rodrigues(who is calling himself Seiva D'arve) had a technique as a kid to experience this sutra: I was very religious with christianity at that time and I heard a priest criticising "Hey, notice that people only remember God and only start praying when they find themselves in some trouble. Why don't you thank God in all sorts of situations and places?" From that moment, When I find myself in any place where the situation is not rotine, when the situation is in some way weird and unexpected, I started feel thankfull for existing is such place and is such condition and for not beeing sick or getting sick despite the current weird situation around me.

   SS #74: In ayahuasca experience, I felt several dimentions crossing themselves and being experienced by me. One dimention crossing another and when in this cosmos when I close one door, in the other side of the universe, one window is open. When I move one arm, in the other side of the universe I moved one leg. I was the universe and I was experiencing the universe as a bunch of connecting lines, connecting chords, where when one thing moves, the counter part that is held to it either by vacum or string, moves... All this was being seen inside my own head, I saw it. This felt king of the experience of Vishnu, Nothing could actually die, things instead of dying, the enter in tight places, filtering themselves and appearing somewhere else. Thing just move themselves to places where they could not be grabed, that is why we don't see the bodies of dead people anymore... They sucumb, they melt and then they flow do lower pressor places. It you includ in your head the vishnu state where all higher pressure places and lower pressure places have a place in your head and are balanced enough for you to see it fully like watching a labirinth from above, then yo see the so called dead stuff actually moving forever. What we cann as death is just the flow of things throw places, throw and across

   SS #75: The best compliment you can give to a person is the imitate. This sutra aparently talks about Autenticity, the ability of being our best version... If somebody misbehaves about one of your attitudes that was not pleasent for them and block you from there life, do not immitate this gesture by blocking back, instead, be a permanent light to the world... allow the other perso to go throw yhe rubber band effect and come back or, if the person does not come back, you can still decide to shine some light on their life... This behavious will give you tremendous joy... you will live by joy and autenticity instead of imitation. If somebody slaps you, add the same behaviour to your life only if you find that such attitude would be a joyfull attitude to apply to every body. If you find such attitude pleasent, give a slap back, otherwise, be a light and an example. People who are unaware of joy tend to be imitate. I suggest you imitation only that wich is the best

   SS #78: It is possible for me to misunderstand this sutra with sutra 13... but I guess this sutra is meant to use when something external "decides" to grab your attention, where 'SS #13' is meant for you to choose a particular point in space. If wad I just said is right... then social media apps is what in my cade robs the most attention out of me (like Instagram and youtube)... And if I am right, I guess this sutra is meant to experience the sensation and feeling that is happening during instagram

   SS #83: It isn't your body that speaks first, it is your mind. Notice that
   
   SS #86: The Nithyananda's video of this is the technique is what makes you move always, each second you are a new person, Therefore this explains the psycdelic trips of fishes with eyes and jesus fishes images, or even the vesica piescis of jesus

   SS #101: Seiva translates this sutra as: "Believe omniscient, omnipotent, permeating, perculating everywhere.." And when we deal with dumb people from the village, we feel the lack of knowing from them, like if inteligence is not yet reaching it's depts.... Another way of seeing this dumb people with stone like brains is to see that their rock like brain is a building block for a bigger scale of "small" particles that we, the observer, cannot yet step in because we are too thin for this rock like scale 

   SS #102: Imagine is GOD can see you and your mistake even if you hide. Like if you steal a bottle of wine and go hide in a barn... Even if nobody knows, imagine that GOD (spirit) knows

   SS #104: Whatever you are experiencing right now visually and with every other sense, take a snapshot of it and keep it until you absorb everything

   SS #106: Sadhguru explains this sutra in inner engeneering as: "I am responsible for everything". Seiva Says: this is the sutra for marriage without burocracy wich is the true marriage :: This is the reason Seiva is with his consort, not because he needs, but because Isaura is beeing treted has him. He left concern for himself and took care of her.

   SS #107: Doesn't the sutra mean that everything is an "eye" of consciousness? each being is this consciousness, right? isn't each vertice of each object one point of consciousness? (just like one of my salvia trips where the wall had eyes)

   SS #108: The TAO, Wu-Wei is the allowance of the individual for the body to freely float along the river... if you leave your body to float with the river, you experience one level of Wu-wei, the TAO... the same way... if you perceive your body's tendencies and routines as if you are simply watching a log of a tree floating along the path of least resistence, now, you see the spirit of guidance... Osho describes in his experience of enlightenment "I felt the power of God, I was not there, God was there... and I went at 1 am in yhr night to a garden where I used to go and I climbed the gate as a thief, I had to do it, I was nit there, God was there". (Osho Words are not those exactly, please watch: https://youtu.be/oqXYUiWVlkU)

   SS #109: Salvia divinorum gives you this one

   SS #112: This sutra describes what Nithyananda calls "Kailash" :: Another place where this sutra was usefull to me was, when talking to a person whose intelect is limited, and when he got into divorce and big problems, he kept his trust in me while repeating his problems on the phone over and over and over and over again, due to lack of know-how to solve it, he kept saying the same things and asking me "do you understand, do you understand?". This person had a huge dificulty to listen to me also, so I must wait and wait and wait for him to listen to me without cutting my words... I felf like hanging... this sutra in a way told me to puropusly do it... His speach swallows my whole time also, nothing of value comes from these calls, so I hang there, just hanging with him on the phone like if we were some how in the same room... 


}

SS #2 {
   - Nithyananda sais in the video that one of Shiva's qualities is "Asudosha", what ever tje society rejects, Shiva accepts, he is pleased with very small things
   - Nithyananda confirms in this
}

Shiva Sutra #7 {
   > With intangible breath in center of forehead, as this reaches the heart at the moment of sleep, have direction over dreams and over death itself.

   video by Nithyananda: "Shiva Sutras Death Demystified" (https://youtu.be/beqUPL4Y2tg)

   - This sutra explains perfectly what by mistake, Seiva experienced at the hospital during army burnout. He tried this sutra during the night and he experienced the death state, he experienced 2 realities at the same time

   Nithyananda: "prana means air energy"
   
   Seiva: something to try: did you ever see a kid trying to sleep sitting down with its head straight? and starting to hit the wall with the head over and over and over? Well: at the moment where you feel so sleepy that your neck starts to wave like a snake, do the sutra. At that moment, head is free falling... stopping... free falling... stopping... yin... yang... yin... yang... ... KEEP YOUR REMAINING wakefull attention in such free fall

   Nithyananda ecplains why spiritual people are called as "reborn" or "borned again" just like jesus said. He explains in his video at min (40:30)
 }

shiva Sutra #16 {
   Nithyananda explains Pratyahara Shambavi Mudra and Sadhana in this video
   evaluate: "$ ss links" to see the link 16 of this video
}

shiva Sutra #17 {

   Nithyananda YouTube video {
      Nithyananda, while explaining SS #17, explains "this moment is inevitable" as taught by Sadhguru in inner engeneering and shambavi
      "The moment you acept you, there won't be any thought"
      Youtube Video: "Catch the thread of existence - Shiva Sutras" (https://youtu.be/c06CTQJfC74)
   }
}

Shiva Sutra #20 {
   Seiva says: Fill the whole car like a statue, still, if you keep you center of mass in line between a strong base and a light head, experience. When you cook bread and you swirl the bread around the container with a certain amount of flour, the uncooked bread can experience the same as you. For the second part of the sutra, you can watch toy story movie at the part where Jessie introduces woody. The woodie's walk with style is an example: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wbkojrVKj-s
   seiva says: "in a stil vehicle, in slowing invisible circles" I think it means that the vehicle must have springs yo bounce a little bit
   
   Seiva says: Vivekananda got enlightened by his guru with this technique: the guru asked if the had the courage to sit. vivekanada sat and the guru put one feet one his chest. by rithmically swaying him, the experience. video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pviWGX7bLF4
}
Shiva Sutra #25 {
   Nithyananda sais at the video "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eq0V-seTR2I": "Patanjali says: Just sit straight and you will enter into meditation"

   Sadhguru tells the story how Ashtavakra Enlightened the king Janaka: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=24HmHvT6M04" (when comming down the horse, stoped at one leg up, one leg down)
   
   # uDev: Create a script at home stereo system: Randomly whistle a sound. The moment you listen to the sound, you must STOP completly without adjusting! (Just like Nithyananda told in his video). Sugestion for sound: rattle snake sound
   
}

Shiva Sutra #28 {

   Nithyananda YouTube video: He says that the sutra itself how it is presented in this list, is a commantary of an enlightened master Abhinavagupta at the 9th century and the sanskrit translation of the sutra is: "Having meditated on the gross and weak shakti in "vada sha endrias" (12 endrias) thus making it subtle, one who enters the heart space and meditates there attains mukti, becomes liberated and takes a quantum jump into ultimate consciousness"
   video from nithyananda: https://youtu.be/ouo1k3mtJRA
}  

Shiva Sutra #83 {
   Nithyananda YouTube video {
      Nithyananda explains something that mooji also explains: Keep every tought aside and see what remains
   }
}

ss 49 {
   - One example of shaken senses is: tapping and untapping your ears like morse code as many people do as a kid
}

SS 91 {
   Nithyananda talks about mariage and divorce in this video acording to india
}
Osho Audios {
   Link: https://oshoworld.com/vigyan-bhairav-tantra-vol-1-01-40/
}

-- Nithyananda says that you cannot separate the master from his experience. If you try to have the experience of the master and reject part of his way of life, the you are in trouble... a master is anybody who can reproduce his experience, so if you follow a master and you want to experience his experience, then you should not reject any aspect of his being... Shiva cannot be separated from shiva sutras, he was teaching them while he was at that moment experiencing them. (That also defines a master, because false masters tell you to practice or do things that they themselves do not do. So, if such practice was so important how is that, that such so called "masters" did not yet strive to embibe and live that way? At this point you distinguish from opinion to mastery). If you do not reject any aspect of shiva's way of life, you may experience the full shiva sutras (so what are his qualities?? how did he dress for each ocasion? try that)... So if you try to behave like shiva in order to experience his experience of life, then there are something else I would like to notice. Sadhguru said that Shiva did not spill is seed, his sperm, because it is used to reach the peak of consciousness... The fundamental vital energy in the system, instead of spilling it, letting it go in a physical manner which would lead to reproduction, he used the same energy to reach the peak of consciousness. He spilled from the top of his head. When a human being is not involved in the reproductive process, naturally his attachment to the body is very minimal. Once his attachment to the body is very minimal, the sense of fear does not exist. When there is no fear, he is naturaly a valiant. That is the consequence of this. (Youtube video where sadhguru tells this: https://youtu.be/G6anZKkPOYM) - Seiva D'Arve
-- Sadhguru sais that these shiva sutras were transpired between 2 people with utmost intimacy, not in terms of sexuality, it means that there was no resustance between the two. Devi was open to whay is being offered. Video: https://youtube.com/shorts/FgBjInkwopA?feature=share






- 6 - If you want to lay eggs around the world, writting each sutra around where you live, where would you place these reminders? Where would we right this numbers of these sutras in front of our eyes for everyday rememberance? > 
Places to drop reminders { 

   SS #13: Usaria uma pilha de relogio ou uma anilha para a colocar no chão a refletir luz do sol para que pudesse olhar para ela

   SS #21: My car, passenger seat

   SS #58: On top of a buildind with view for the crowd

}
