Introduction by sadhguru: https://youtube.com/shorts/FgBjInkwopA?feature=share

Sources from internet say: Vijñāna Bhairava Tantra (sometimes spelled Vigyan Bhairav Tantra) is a 5000+ year old Sanskrit text of the Shaivism. The text is a chapter from the Rudrayamala Tantra, a Bhairava Agama.

This text file is composed by: {
   _1_ Pure seiva Understandings and experiences of life to better describe how to practice the sutras (some understandings may come from himself, osho, nithyananda etc. whatever the source, it is written from the pount of view of Seiva)
   -2- Nithyananda video transcriptions (text copied from the videos without any editing)
   -3- Osho video transcriptions (text copied from the videos without any editing)
   -4- Nithyananda key words of each sutra (composed and filtered by Seiva to best and quick understandingbof the sutra before each practice session
   -5- Osho key words of each sutra (composed and filtered by Seiva to best and quick understandingbof the sutra before each practice session
   -6- If you want to lay eggs around the world, writting each sutra around where you live, where would you place these reminders? Where would we right this numbers of these sutras in front of our eyes for everyday rememberance? > 
}

NOTE: > From 64 Shiva Sutras, one sutra lists 112 Meditation Techniques (112 Dharanas)

NOTE: Nithyananda says: "The message of the Shiva Sutras is: You are Divinity!"

uDev: Pesquisar a ligacao do Sufis (do sufismo) e qual shiva sutra é praticado na sua danca
uDev: Descobrir qual foi o Sutra com o Qual o Rei Janaka se iluminou (nao esquecer que o foco que ele ganhou com uma perna no ar e com uma perna no cavalo elé semelhante a ganhar foco entre o ponto A e o ponto B, esquecendo A e B... Da mesma forma quando olhamos para o ceu estrelado, quando encontramos 3 estrelas, conseguimos olhar fixamente para um ponto a meio dessas duas estrelas fixamente esquecendo as duas estrelas? conseguimos fazer como os telescopios modernos que fazem fotos de longa exposicao em sitios onde aparentemente nao havia nada? É que com os telescopios modernos quando fazemos fotos de longa exposicao entre 2 estrelas (esquecendo ambas) temos ao fim de algum tempo a reduzida luz a entrar na lente do telescopio e a format imagens que as vezes revelam constelacoes inteiras naquele sitio que aparentemente nao tinha nada
uDev: "All the rules are my rules" descobrir qual e o shiva sutra. Alem disso, existe uma cena no filme "Dune 1" em que a Fremen equipa no rapaz pela primeira vez, mas o rapaz ja conhece os seus costumes antes de os conhecer. Essa cena é para se descobrir o link
uEev: Seiva sais: The self is like a stage, where in, the world plays all its dances, musics, etc.: Find the corresponding sutra

Seiva sobre liberation/liberdade/mukti/aghora: Quando alguém te contradizer quando afirmas que poucas pessoas sao independentes incluindonessas peara quem falas. Prova-lhes que não sao independentes e que não atinjiram mukti... puxa do vomito e vê se elas vão atras de ti... se forem atras de ti, não estao em mukti

Vishnu vs. Shiva: Provavelmente, para os nao iluminados que experimentam estes sutras, vao passar de "Constantemente nao iluminados" para "Permanentemente iluminados", e provavelmente é que dizem que Vishnu é superior a Shiva porque ele cria o contraste, faz de proposito para sentir o sutra "ON" e depois faz de proposito para voltar a consciencia do nao iluminadao "OFF". Esse estado que Vishnu de sentir o divino ON / OFF faz ele sentir o contraste (tal como jesus falava do Sal da terra). E sentir o contraste é o que faz a vida ser vibrante. Ou seja, o nao iluminado vai ter de fazer um esforco enorme para entender estes sutras apos a primeira vez que se aperceberem que existem, vai fazer um esforco enorme para atingir a consciencia de Shiva, mas se Entrarem demasiado depressa na consciencia de shiva podem ficar "queimados" com tanta energia de uma so vez. A kundalini ao percorrer um corpo mal introduzido e mal preparado destroi o corpo... Assim, vishu é aquele que molha os pés na consciencia de shiva e retira-os, depois molha mais um pouco e retira-os... apos fazer isso varias vezes e os pes ja aguentarem estar permanenremente nesse estado, vai comecar a fazer o mesmo aos poucos com as pernas... e assim sucessivamente pes, pernas, joelhos, pernas, cintura, barriga, maos, bracos, ombros peito e bracos tudo junto, pescoco e por fim, cabeca, concluindo de mergulhar todo o corpo... Aquilo que eu disse com a consciencia de shiva, imagina que é uma pessoa a entrar lentamenre em agua muito fria....  caso entrasse de uma so vez, podia criar serios problemas tal como congestoes, e ate morrer.... Se vishnu suavemente ascender à mais altissima vibracao, estaria com um pé 100% em cima do mais altissimo (Shiva) e com o outro pé em cima do mais excentrico e mundano (brahama) ou seja, estaria em cima da metade de baixo da onda sonora e metado de cima da onda sonora. A onsa sonora nesse momento seria uma modulacao de onda quadra HI / LOW, apenas em 2 estados apenas, Shiva Extremos e Shiva extremo (no entanto como so existem 2, consegue gerir os dois) e para aceder a outras frequencias teria de lentamente descender.... Vishu tem de lentamente ascender e lentamente descender (dai as suas vimanas, que sao meios de transporte adequados as muadancas que possam acontecer no corpo fisico. Uma vimana podia ser um aviao que tem consideracao pela pressao nos ouvidos dos passangeiros quando muda de altutide muito rapido


Shiva Sutras sao a mais brilhante forma de Swa Tantra
NOTE: VBT intro: By going fiercely into each technique, applying your energy there, then you are starting the destruction process. Destruction is needed to create something new (The Rudra Principle). Shiva is the destroyer... Nithyananda sais renunciation is needed only for the things you don't have. Do not renouce the things you have, only the things you don't have... If you go deep in each technique renoucing and destroying the inner chattering about the things you don't have, then you are shiva. - Seiva compilation
NOTE: VBT intro: Shiva Sutras are not philosophies, because philosophy does not give solutions, it only mentions problems and questions.
NOTE: VBT intro (about the intelect): According to Seiva, a person who lives without finding her/his center and instead lives only with intelect, will always be unfulfilled because possibilities for the intelect are too many. Notice that Shiva did not answer Devi intelectually, he does not answer to her questions, instead he goes around and give a technique for her to experience the answer. The same way I cannot make my mother's stomach digest food, I cannot answer experiencial questions, What I can do is to give a method that leads to such experiencei (Osho also mentions this). In this next video of Paramahansa Yogananda, he tells a story of GOD answering to a person (seiva also adds, the person is intelectual and GOD is answering intelectual like brahama. There is also a movie from Hollywood where it is actually satan who creates this mess that GOD of Yogananda is describing. The holliwood video is called "Bedazzled"  and the actor is Brendan Frasere
NOTE: VBT intro: Auspiciousness is the quality you can aquire that is responsible for you to feel Grace (also called Karona) because whatever happens without cause (causeless auspiciousness) is great, like the wind and unespectedly blows against your face without motive, without cause.
NOTE: VBT intro (comparing Jesus to Ganapati): you cannot get better than the combination of Omnipresence+Omnipotence+Omniscience, therefore, Around shiva there was Ganas, his friends... if Shiva is the combination of the 3 Omnis because all three start from their 0D, what we and the ganas can do, is to join his "club"... We cannot worship Shiva because it does not exist, we can only become that. Shivoham mantra means "I am Shiva"... So the Ganas are a group of being already becoming like shiva or already eradiating the Shiva Consciousness. The brightest of the Ganas was known as Ganapati and his name was Ganesh... Who ever understands Ganesh, understands Shiva Inteligence, therefore one this he is known for is Obstacle remover, because if you cannot understand shiva but instead you can understant another expression of it, then, problem solves, you could not understand shiva but you could understand ganesh, and that is good enough... Another person whom we could call Gana (According to Seiva D'Arve) was Jesus, because he was radiating Consciousness (the divine father principle) and that is why he replied to those who asked the question "Can we see your father?" with the answer "If you see me, you see the father"... The same way, if you understand the Ganas meaning (which is the club around the 3 omnis) understands that it is impossible to be higher than Shiva, it is only possible to join the club.... Who ever tried to be Higher than Shiva only failed like for example Lucifer... Lucifer wanted to be better than the omni, that is why he was kept inside duality by himself... remember thar higher does not exist without the lower and vice versa. If lucifer wants to be taller or higher than the floor, you just stand on top of the foor, but if you want to be taller or higher than the seiling of the room, the only way is to put your feet on the seiling, making your head upside down.. and that lucifer was called a fallen angel, because he put his feet on the seiling to simulate being higher than it... :: Regra de 3 simples: Os ganas estao para Shiva assim como Jesus está para o Pai... como Jesus era nequela sociedade o unico filho de Deus, o unico caminho com verdade e vida, ele era naquela epoca para os Judeus o maior Gana, ele era o "Ganapati" daquele sitio. :: Resumindo, Jesus e Ganesh estavam nas mesmas circunstancias na vida... Jesus era a maior representacao de Deus naquele pais. Ganesha era a maior representacao de Shiva naquele grupo de ganas. :: 
NOTE: VBT intro (Was 'Shiva' his name?): nao dá para dar um nome ao yogi Shiva, se fosse possivel dar-lhe um nome significava que ele ja nao tinha todas aquelas qualidades
NOTE: VBT intro: Yaksha Swaroopa maening: Yaksha: Aparicao; Swaroopa: is the form or image of the ecstasy of the Creator.
NOTE: VBT intro (about ganga): According to Seiva, it is said that in himalayas every mountain peak is Shiva (read directly from the source: https://isha.sadhguru.org/mahashivratri/shiva/shiva-ganga/). Not just because Shiva sits on the peak of awareness but also because it is on top of the mountains that the rivers start to flow... So shiva wears the ganga on his head, not only because he sit on the peak of conscousness but also because he sit unmoving like a moutain. Some yogis like Sadhguru also mentions the quality of the whater of Ganga that is of such nutricional value that by drinking one stomack full of this water, gives you energy of one full day without food, and this does not happen anywhere else... There is more to it...
NOTE: VBT intro (Names of shiva): "Asudosha: Easily pleased (meaning that you don't need much to please him)" :: Maha Deva: The greates GOD of the GODs
NOTE: VBT intro (all symbols): The Moon Crescent – Ardha-Chandrama; Body smeared with ashes; Matted Hair / Jata; The Ganga; The Third Eye; Half Open Eyes; The Snake Around the Neck; Tripunda (on the forehead); Tiger Skin; The Rudraksha Necklace; Damaru, the Drum; Trishul; Kamandalu; Kundalas (male ear ring and female ear ring); Mount Kailash; Nandi, the Bull. (one possible source: https://vedicfeed.com/meaning-behind-symbols-of-lord-shiva/). (one possible source: https://vedicfeed.com/meaning-behind-symbols-of-lord-shiva/).
NOTE: Shiva Sutras connect us with the three aspects of Shiva within us: Satyam (the truth), Shivam (the goodness), Sundaram (the beauty). If Satyam is not permanent it is not truth, it does not center the weel of the universe :: Yoga: Juntar o util ao agradavel eternamente.
NOTE: Sound of bansuri in Nithyananda Videos: Pleasing the Lord - Shivranjani (feat. Rakesh Chaurasia) - Pandit Hariprasad Chaurasia
NOTE: About "Soma Rasa": Deus deu-nos um passeio de 80 anos, Jorge Luis Borges (escritor argentino) says: Every path in life leads you to death, loose yourself!
Note: Only if you can die after each task you do (live living life fully during yhe execution of it) then you can be auspicious. Because if the next event is worse that this one, how can you say that this next event is great? when the next event is week, you can only honestly say it is great if what has passed was already lived fully and you know it is past. 
NOTE: There is no Religion Higher Than Truth
NOTE: Too many pictures depict Shiva walking with a serpent on his neck.... That is not how it happens, I can teach you to do the same thing with a cat's tail, exactly the same thing... Shiva was visited by a snake only when he was sitting still on the ground.... No movement, no snake bite, that is how it happens... The key word for what is happening here is Sinergy, the enrgy that happens relatively to each other, depending on what the other half is acting, accordingly you react, act and wait for response (this respinse enables you to read the mood and behaviour). -Naghori
NOTE: Sound Nithyanda puts on his videos: "Pleasing the Lord - Shivranjani"; https://youtu.be/bO6LJTw1Gf0 

ExPressa: Será que uma exeriencia psicadelica, tal como a vida, não salta naturalmente entre cada um destes 112 Sutras? se não salta, tens de observar melhor estes sutras.... Uma das minhas experiencias sobre estes sutras é: Se nao entendeste o primeiro sutra, passa para o segundo, se nao entendeste passa para o quarto... assim continuando, apercebe-se desse sutra e do seu numero, és bom nos shiva sutras se te aperceberes como é que o primeiro sutra que traz a mesma experiencia que o segundo sutra, que o tercero sutra, o vigésimo, o penultimo, todos... todos incluindo o ultimo... Salta de sutra em sutra e faz a experiencia do enredo entre eles... Faz a tua vida só 112 sutras como se fosse um jogo completo... Se o fizeres como um jogo, apercebes-te da santissima trindade: A percepção e si (a luz da consciencia. Aquilo que permea e percula a existencia, Eu..) está presente em todo o vazio e todo o vacuo... quando esse ar/vazio/espaço é preenchido por fumos ou cheiros, isso é a alma do sitio que pode-nos dár um falso eu (identidade) e aquilo que é mair rigido na vida ao mesmo tempo que não é permanete, é a materia (o corpo). O corpo e a alma está nos no estomago, não so esta nele, está fora dele e é ele. 
Expressa: Qual é o valor que as coisas gratis tem? Não é um paradoxo só darmos valor às coisas que são pagas se as coisas gratis é que nos dão sem termos de entregar nada em troca? Eu Seiva D'Arve afirmo que invisto muito do meu tempo e atençao às coisas que são gratis porque essas é que so me trouxeram lucro em vez de prejuizo... Mas tambem existem coisa gratis do outro lado do mundo, se existem la coisas gratis, para eu lá ir com meios de transporte pagos deixam de ser pagos, portanto, na vida as coisas que nos trazem menos prejuizo são aquelas que ja ca estamos e que são gratis. Se tens acesso a coisas gratis, só tens de escolher se queres interagir com elas ou não. Estes shiva sutras são exemplos de coisas gratis que ja ca temos e com as quais podemos interagir se quisermos e podemos observar sem interagir se quisermos, cada sutra tem a possibilidade destas duas vertentes (interagir com/só observar). se não entenderes estes sutras, muda a tua interação com o sutra. Observa por exemplo alguem (para ser se interage com o sutra no seu dia-a-dia) ou observa-te a ti sem o fazer, ou fáz o que o sutra pede, etc etc etc... Apercebe-te só do que o sutra fala ou então absorve esse comportamento nem que seja temporariamente.
ExPressa: Shiva é o Deus Si  (Nao da para nos proprios sermos maiores di que Deus, so da para embeber para si priprio todas as qualidades e se tornar indistinguivel com o absoluto)



Shiva sutras: 84, 61, 99, 108, 112. One of them could be the description of: Feeling as if I AM ALWAYS HERE, I am in the center of where I am always, I never go anywhere, but things come to me... When I walk in the street and see a wall, if I walk to the wall, because my prespective keeps in the center of me, then I am walking so that the wall comes to me... And if the planet is a sphere, and if I have strnght in the legs to balance myself on top of a ball, then when I walk, both me and the ball (that wr call planet) because we are in space friction-less, then I am rotating the ball below my feet, and I keep beeing where I was, but I walked the ball (planet) into rotation so that I could reach other objects. I think SS# 112 is the sutra that conveys this

Shiva sutras about breath (by Darve) {
   It seeems that it might be correct:

   #1: Breath Veeeeeery slowly at inhalation and Breath Veeeeeery slowly at exalation  :: 
   #2: Yang Part: the curves
   #3: Find "Khumaari" (neither Yin nor Yang, the tangent STRAIGHT line). The place where it is indistinguishable which breath it is
   #4: Yin  Part: the tips [Involuntary]
   #5: unknown
   #6: Breath as the rithm of all daily life actions
   #7: Unknown
   #8: Very fast fluttering of the breath. [Voluntarily]. Attempting to survive only with the tips of the breath
}

_1_ Seiva Descriptions {
   SS #1: if I am not mistaken, this is the essence of the shambavi maha mudra kryia... this technique must be done slooooowly like the sun moving slowly, like dawn

   SS #2: It is a sutra that will manifest when you drop your identity if is fully social. So in order for best practice I suggest taking a small trip the the woods in the morning when the atmosphere ia little colder than the body and little unconfortable, and in such place, empty of social distractions and demanding of you to evaporate your temperature, drop all of your clothes and relax! If somebody appraches the place, if you feel these woods are not governamental place you somebody else propriety, you don't even have to feel afraid of your security, relax and meet them this way

   SS #3: if I am not mistaken, this is the essence of the shambavi maha mudra kryia... this technique is the fast fluttering of the breath (either the fluttering is this tecknique or SS#8  ::  Nao tenho a certeza disto, mas acho que a tecnica do sadhguru de entoar muito subitamente a palavra "Shambo" que é constantemente entoada por ele e que tambem foi usado pela viji para atingir mahasamadhi, foi esta tecnica, pelo que eu percebo, ambas as pontas do folego podem ser mais redondas ou mais bicudas, e esta tecnica deixa-nos aperceber dessas curvas do folego como se ambas fossem bicudas. Se as curvas do folego forem bicudas, vai haver o abrandamento (esvaziamento ou enchimento) da respiracao num instante anterior á explosão que é a nova respiracao (enchimento ou esvaziamento). Ou seja, se em ambas as curvas da respiracao tu fizeres dessas curvas mais bicudas do que mais suaves, vais ter o pico onde o 'acabar de esvaziar suave' dá um salto quantico para para o 'começar a encher explosivo' (ou do acabar de encher suave para o inicio do esvaziar explosivo)

   SS #4: Shiva Sutra responsavel pelo meu bufo alvarius "when it is all out and stops by itself" "dificult only if you thinks it is dificult because it is not". I had a dream where I was jumping around in a ceramic floored garden with waterfalls and in one of my jumps on the starcase, I was slow looking at the step below and could not find the ground and started falling in sky diving mode. In this dive, My eyes started looking correctly to the ground and calculating the impact time. During the fall I felt the adrenaline of falling and therefore my breath was all out. Due to the fact I was not calculating a slow stop at the ground, I kept screaming and my breath was all out until the colision. then I hit the ground and woke up. This dream due to the fall adrenaline, became a lucid dream." In bufo... my energy/prana was all out right before finding my face. when, in my hand movements searching for the face the hands found themselves without finding the face. The orgasm of the universe happened. The face was not found by the hands but the hands colided. So, to practice this sutra, in the breath cicle divided by 4 (in, pause, out, pause) find the breath when it is all out at the same time you CONTINUOUSLY imagine yourself already there. To help, imagine yourself eternaly falling (because the vibration of the air movement in your nostrils is one of your subconcient tools to keep time for you) and in this eternal falling it is already the universal pause. The sensation of this falling is the same sensation of the breath going out without the curve upwards. Fell eternaly the sensation of only the breath out without the pause because everything else except the outgoing breath is the pause. If you ignore the upward breeath, your small self vanishes (because matter can only be ciclical and you are removing the other half of the breatbecause everything else except the outgoing breath is the pause. If you ignore the upward breeath, your small self vanishes (because matter can only be ciclical and you are removing the other half of the breathbecause everything else except the outgoing breath is the pause. If you ignore the upward breeath, your small self vanishes (because matter can only be ciclical and you are removing the other half of the breatbecause everything else except the outgoing breath is the pause. If you ignore the upward breeath, your small self vanishes (because matter can only be ciclical and you are removing the other half of the breatbecause everything else except the outgoing breath is the pause. If you ignore the upward breeath, your small self vanishes (because matter can only be ciclical and you are removing the other half of the breatbecause everything else except the outgoing breath is the pause. If you ignore the upward breeath, your small self vanishes (because matter can only be ciclical and you are removing the other half of the breath). Again: Step 1 - take a look at the drawing where the breath is divided in 4 aspects (inward, curve down, outward, curve up). Step 2 - If you think you have to find the pause in the turning point, it seems dificult. Therefore, if enlightenment is already there and is already your inner space, then something must be continuous without cicles. Step 3: Dissect the sensation you have of the air movement and the body feelings when the breath is going out before slowing down. The part of the out-going breath that is fast going down/out is what we need. Step 4 - Feel that sensation/notive that sensation constantly as if you could only breath out. Step 5 - each time out going breath happens, add energy to your vision of falling down, relaxing. Step 6 - Allow yourlself to forget the incoming breath, that is the only way your small self is able to vanish. The universal pause will happen this way because the inward breath will not be there, that itself is an absence, a pause!. \n\n In my bufo alvarius this was what was happening to me because I could not feel my self but could feel an eternal flow of energy. I felt the will to play and shout because there "was nobody there ouside of me, the room felt inexistent" and my energy was spread outside of my skin. Shiva says "when breath is all out (up)", so, when you exale relax into your centar (spine stight, sitting for exaple) and this way, if you get yourself imagining a free fall, the air is moving upwards only, therefor he says "when breath is all out (up)". \n\n One more thing. when practicing this tecknique, focus on the breath turn which is more convenient to you. The most convinient is the one breath that takes longer to slow down before starting turning in the opposite direction because it can be used by you to find your relaxation. Keep relaxing into your chair continuously and imagining the 2 paralell lines downwards, the eternal fall/out-breath plus the segment of out-breath that is extracted from the other 3 parts of the breath cicle. This one segment is what you must use as imagination to feel your longer eternal breath. Every sensation and vibration of the body is suposed to be felt as the air slaping on your face when falling in sky dive. \n\n In my bufo, there was a part where my hands kept tracking the face and found themselves. When they found themselves in the air above my head (I was lying down) They kept pressing on each other as is is was not the end of their movement. Of course, If my involuntary intention was to keep moving the hands, the phisically stoped by themselves because I commanded nothing, they colided alone. \n\n Also in my bufo, there I remember that when I smoked I knew I don't even know how long this experience could happen, I was aware that I did not knew when it would end. :: Another thing... would it be correct if in this sutra we would have to use our entire lung capacity in each breath?

   SS #5: What if, looking through 3rd eye means "where ever I look, there is a black dot in the middle of all vision, and If both my eyes are still and relaxed, then the black dot is the point where all focus begins spreading from, until 120° of vision, then 180° then 360° of vision spreads"? I am not sure of this yet. But it would make sense of the teaching of Nithyananda, here a guru used to give a trishul for students to focus on all 3 tips at once. Maybe it is not with the eyes, but with the 3rd eye. A certain black dot in front of us that would be irrelevant for how many trishul tip would be in front of us as long it is in our landscape

   SS #9: Na minha experiencia com o Bufo, quanto mais fazia efeito, mais silencioso eu ficava por dentro e ao mesmo tempo, mais barulhento eu ficava por fora... Ao chegar mais perto do meu nucleo psicadelicamente, mais eu gritava involuntariamente ate gritar em plenos pulmoes. Ou seja, quanto mais perto da quietude interna, mais perto tambem da furia externa: "Enraged in wrath, stay so..."

   SS #10: cuddling and kissing and caressing has a beggining and an end while we humans are animals and also need time for other aspects of life like sleeping and eating etc... so if cuddling is not permanent, enter intonthe idea that it is... while beeing caressed, shift your idea of impermanent caress to permanent caress, fell as if this process will not have an end.... if you do not like the caress, the dislike will be purged because it will be your new normal, fell as if that caress is your new normal, your 'tara' button of the scale, the zero between -1 and 1, the felling that you are most familiar of... 

   SS #11: In my imature experience, stopping the doors of the senses means: not to be rigid while perceiving the ant in the arm, instead, feel the ant as if it is in the center of your experience, in the center of your universe, because if that happens, you feel the energy (bhairav) but not the location of the creeping

   SS #12: In order to get in tune with this sutra very very fast, you must be very very good in surrender... surrender all you muscle activity, surrender all the commitments you hold in your mind, surrender even the alarm clock that is going to ring a few hours later if you are practicing this to rest

   SS #13: If you notice, the peacock has many fake eyes in it's tail... each eye has the five coloured cicles mentioned in the sutra :: I gess the way to experience this sutra is to stare at something with eyes wide open... it you do so.... the colors of what you are staring at will start to dye out from the center to the circumference (I used to confuse this sutra with the 78 yhat talks about atention that alights. :: This sutra is probably the one that was used by Sadhguru unconsciously when he was young and was staring at an ant, at a leaf or at any dot for hours... he would also be staring at darkness, and that would be another sutra (sutra 77) :: This is probably the sutra where people stare at a candel's light steadily :: I guess this experience was one that I gelf when I used salvia nd mushrooms, where looking at a fixed bright point across the window, the multitude of reflections of the universe opened up and for that, my eyes hed to close and twist a little jist like shiva eyes :: If this sutra is what re-creates my combined experience of salvia+mushrooms, then trully you can see the whole peacock tail all around you just like my trip experience. I was able to see all 360 degrees around me a net of eyes just like the cover of the book "DMT" from the author Rick Straussman

   SS #14: Technique to use when yoy are in yhe bed trying to sleep but you are restless constantly moving without stopping, always unconfortable in each pisition... if yhat is the case you are at rest in some part of the body and without rest at some other part of the body... in yhat case, lock yourself lock your muscles in such a way that you rest in a tense form, you may be ywisted in the body, yor back may even be arched back or twisted some way, but you can find that assymetric looking pisition like a sheet of metal that gets crooked by either too hot water or too cold water.... the sheet of metal bends, this bending is the middle tentions betwwen the two temperatures... so when you are in the bed, decide to rest and in that rest you will find the urge to move to the second full rested position, start the movement to the second position but stop in the middle, stop in the middle of the two restfull pisitions and the only way to do that is by finding a certain disconfort... you know that you have found this sutra when the unconfortable position which is in the middle of the 2 restfull positions expend for each and every muscle of the body... if your whole body muscles contrubute to this positions, you will find yourself locked in the middle of the bhairava (the energy), in the middle of the two rest positions. At this point, dharana is the method described to find this midlle position. To find and ininterruptedly experience this full body tension in between two restfull positions, and the the energy you are putting out will be consumed until samadhi.... until ko energy is no more there, and you will find not  2 restfull positions + 1 restless positions, but 3 restfull positions.... samadhi; Is it possble that bharatanatyam dance would be good to practice this??

   SS #15 {

      Explanation from Seiva: If you close only the ears with the entire palm of your hands, you can feel a continuos white noise. Probably all the five senses have to be shut to produce the same white noise for each sense. Eyes closed do not need the hands to do it because when it is shut, you can see that the blackness is not pure black. It is rather a noise with both white, black and even colors if you are under yhe sun. The ears must be shut with at least one finger to produce the white noite, the cheeks must have one finger to produce a sensation (preferably near all the other senses, not far away like in the feet). one finger at the tongue to actually taste it. One finger partially blocking the nostrils to make the reverberation of air rushing throgh it. So.... from the 5 fingers, from pinky to the thumb: Pinky inside the mouth so that it could be tasted; Next finget inside the nostrils blocking them; next finger place on the eyes so that the blocking allows freedom of eye movement without actually opening the eyes. Next finget on the forehead to tap the skeen (it could be the cheeks or any place where the touch sense wotks); and the thumb on the ears producing the withe noite.... Now, tap the fingers and experiemnt with all 5 senses at once until you fimd the bindi  ::  In case this is not about the 5 senses, then just close the mouth and eyes normally, block only the nostrils and ears with the fingers (only 4 fingera are needes, 2 for each hand)

      Explanation from Nithyananda why some enlightned masters sever limbs of their disciples to get them enlightened:
         (he gives the meaning of tapas): - Tapas: Ready to work on the technique at any cost, any risk
                                          - Therefore this technique is only for those whom enlightenment becomes FIRST priority
                                          - Also there is a certain relationship between master and disciple that is so genuine that this method works
                                          - This technique only works when a certain relationship between master and disciple is there.

      A very good explanation of Maya is found in the video where Nithyananda explains this sutra
         (video: "Just Fall In - Shiva Sutras in Nithyananda Videos"; URL: https://youtu.be/Gkp2p7JVLB)
   }

   SS #20: Shiva's mount (or shiva's vehicle) is a bull. I suppose, when the bull is wild, shiva is the cowboy who manage to stay on top of it somehow, balanced, while the bull jumps and runs  ::  When travelling by train for example, close your eyes, and stabilize yourself in your seat. When the spine starts waving, there will be two tips for it. The bottom tip which is moving exaclty like your seat and there is the top tip of you spine that is freely waving around... Put your focus on the top tip, because paradoxically it is the only one moving but you can experience it as if it was not moving. Center yourself with it and center your conciousness in it, and it will be the only place that does not move around at all  ::  This might be the sutra related to astral travel, astral projection because, when is a still vehicle, when moving in SLOWING invisible circles, there will be a point where your nervous system stop giving commands to you muscles to move all the heavy weight to start moving only half the weight to move only some weight and finally, to move weight, but not enough weight to actually move, and this might be called the phantom movement. Your nervous system is precise enough and can move smaller weights than you entire back and torso weight, the nervous system can decide your body to move so little distance that it cannot defeat the innertia of its actual weight. and this is what is needed in astral projection. When we wake up either during night or in the morning, do not move, do not move at all, rathar have the intention to move, have the intention to rotate to the other side of the bed, and it is said that you can go outside of your body like this. In astral projection, after waking up in the bed dont move, have the intention only and you separate from the body.

   SS #25: Seiva created a script to ring a bell randomly at any time within 24 hours, and the person who is aware of the script/program, will stop as soon as the bell is rang. So, after this, there is a question... what to do if you stop and then you have the inpulse again of continuing your life and do something? Well, we must undertand that this sutra is a technique and is meant for you to be aware if the stopping, it is not for you to become lazy... therefore you definitly will continue with your life at some point. If life is really flowing and if at some point you feel yhat your life is goung to continue, than keep up the game of the shiva sutras (as per SS #110: "Gracious one, play...") and the script will suggest the sutra #108 to you the player where, before you continue to run your life, first you see where the flow of life is trying to pull you thowards

   SS #27: Maybe this is the origin of the Dance "Shiva Tandava"

   SS #28: My girlfriend is incapable of saying portuguese curse worfs like "cagalhão, fuck, hore, shit" etc... And I keep her in this zone where I spell each silable of each word and slowly, very slowly she joins each silable and pieces the deprivation I put her into. She says the first silable of a curse word and I wait for it to create a certain feeling in her mind... then I do the next for the next silable... The moment each silable of the word gains a new meaning, now, we join the together  ::  Probably this is what Patanjali calls Santosha in the Asthanga Yoga, where the idia of get out of your daily routine is reminded to you that is possible and enjoyable. Santosha is the act of getting out of your samsara (daily routine) on purpose and enjoy it. For example now, at this hour of the day, what is it that you usually do? can you do something spontaneous that you never did before? Also, repetition leaves you dull, lack of contract on the 5 senses happens, can you transcend such deprivation? Can you suddenly jump into some activity never done before that will keep you like a child in it's early ages when the child is fully amazed of the diversity of the universe and asks all the "how" and the "why" of everything

   SS #29: Do you feel stuck somewhere or wuth something? devote yourself to the process, are you in jain? devote yourself to the process, devotions frees. Sadhguru sais in Inner Engeneer ans in Shambavi: "All the rules are my rules". Devotion may make you feel smaller, seeing everything bugger that you, in case your handcuffs start increasing in size where you are smaller and smaller, suddenly they may loose grip or your hands ang you may escape. God is definitly bigger, right?  ::  Seiva says: I feel the quality of devotions must be related with the quality of Auspiciousness someway somehow. Because when in real life examples where you feel stuck (like going to a new job to survive and hate the co-workers) to say "let the situation be auspicious, let's see what good is comming from this bad situation" is very similar to say "let me get closer to the co-workers I hate eventhow I hate their habits, to see very close why they do these worst things that I hate, and to partitipate in their stuff long enought for them to start accepting my sugestions and opinions"... Auspiciousness is to realise that every thing might bring you sulfillment somehow and Devotion is to glue yourself with the JOYFULL things your worst enemies do and by doing that you can start changing their direction in life by beeing their inner voice as a friend and inner voice by not coliding directly.  ::  Existe uma frase que diz "se nao podes vencer os teus enimigos, junta-te a eles" Ou seja, usando a analogia de fazer movimentar uma viatura usando a força. Se nao consegues fazer com que um carro ande em frente ao empurrar o mesmo usando a força, entao entre dento dele e faz as coisas como se tu e o carro fossem um so, usa a inteligencia e faz uso das peças internas do veiculo incluindo o motor. Mete-o a trabalhar e segue em frente

   SS #30: This is probably the sutra I use to notice the sensation of each emotion very intensly and keep being with it until it is all burnt and finished. When I want to be a serial killer, such emotion I do express as being a serial killer but with a box sac

   SS #34: I was shocked when I was helping the yearly party of my village as staff, when a litle girl to whom I did not know, sat on my lap playfully because there was no more seats, and asked me to make my leg jump like a horse... I was shocked because she was inocent and I did not know who's parent is this girl, I was 31 years of age and this image remained in my mind for a few years... this shock, these open eyes, I guess it is the lesson of this shiva sutra... I just went for a few days comtemplating of being like here, being true with other people without holding on hipotesis and play with people trully playfully  ::  Listen to the mistacal sound is imparted? is he talking about the minimal sound our hears can listen when no sound is playing during the night? Because during the night, in bed, no music, no noise outside, all that makes our ears listen to their own noise, a sound that is only plsying in our head.... is that the mistical teaching to be listened to? and is it meant for such noise to be related to the noise our eyes see during a black room with no lights? Is shiva trying to relate both noises? are we earimg the noise our eyes see? and does the pain of permanently open eyes related to both noises?... For the sake of experimenting I will try to associate the sound of my ears with the movement of the noise of my eyes and the pain of keeping my eyes open, I will relate all of then as one even. I will seek a dark room at the middle of the night and I will stare at the seilling

   SS #35: In one sentence what I would say is: "Notice depth... either if it is a well of if it is masters's eyes"

   SS #35: Jusy as Lao Tzu taught his disciple: stay on this bridge and do not go out until river stops and bridgr moves.. At that moment you know the yin yang... but further continuing, go on changing your prespective from yin to yang, from yang to yin, from yin to yang until you see the snake wich is sushumna... the edge of the bridge will not be a straight line if you keep changing you eyes from yin to yang, yang to yin... your eyes will like you are drunk. Bridge moving + river sptoped = Ida. Bridge flowing + River moving = Pingala. The edge that separates both can be a fixed surface or a wave form, that is sushumna

   SS #36: Just like a hen moves its head, you move your eyes.... vision does not get blury to you because eyes are fast to start moving and fast stopping, just like a hen is fast start moving the head and fast stopping..... we are do used to move the eyes fast that we can no longer drag them slowly and see the landscspe blury (but try to do it)  ::  If you have dificulty widrawl your eyes from an abject, wave your head like the people of india does and you will get dizzy at the same time that your eyes will star dragging. Indians dance will their head when they agree or disagree with you. For this sutra, moving your head will feel like twisting the strings of light that otherwise come in straight lines from the object into your eyes.  ::  I think one way to practice is to: 1.Look at the object; 2.only move your head in the opposite direction while slowly clising your eye; 3. Before the head stops moving, when your eyes are already disconnected, remove your thought from it; 4. While the head is still moving, enjoy the bliss of such satvic feeling

   SS #38: From nithyananda videos (for example: Silence Within || Part 2 || Shiva Sutras || 25 May 2007 (https://youtu.be/Id8EqNKoOKI)) we can understan why shiva wears the ganga in his head... it is because soud is eternal and shiva in in the center of it. BATHE IN THE CENTER OF SOUND, because at each moment sound exists.
   
   SS #38: This is one of those techniques you can practice EVERY where, even in the market place
   
   SS #39: This sutra is explained very well by Sadhguru in inner engeneering. When you entone the AUM, keep your focus centered on the reverberation happening on either the belly or wherever the sound is actually happening.

   SS #40: The expression of slowly singing this bajhan in the beggining (https://youtu.be/i7B4SspgC0w) shows the bliss in her face. A bajhan is an oportunity to use the music to refine our voice pitches

   SS #42: The best sound I know for this, is the bansuri sound that Nithyananda has at the end of his videos

   SS #44: The origin of the zen koan: Find out the sound of one hand clapping

   SS #47: Nithyananda says you can use your spiritual name if it has been given to you by an enlightened being, you can use your GOD's name (in my case, krishna or Shiva or shambo) or your Guru's name (in my case, one of my gurus whose name gave me once a profound experience just by uttering the name, is Ayahuasca... A-ya-ua-sssssss-ca!)

   SS #50: Existe um curso da Isha em que as pessoas aos pares se sentam frente a frente numa cadeira e simplesmente olham um para o outro. acho que é o Samyama. E so de se olharem cara a cara sentados nas suas cadeiras sem se tocarem, "transformation".

   SS #52: You can only be filled if before you were empty... This sutra is maybe best with a long fasting period... And maybe an experience comes where you feel what is actually the "grid" of cells that live inside you (as you, as a being, as a being you), the celulat tissue that does not no out after pooping and does not change after ingesting a meal... After a long period of fasting, the focus we feel while eating something (juicy for example) feels divine  ::  Este é o sutra da ultima ceia de Jesus, O pao (chamado óstea) torna-se no corpo de Deus e o Vinho torna-se o Sangue de Deus.  ::  when putting tap water into the mouth, sometimes it does not feel good. But if you are sure that such water is proper for comsumption, fill your mouth with water and just wait for hours with tje same water in the mouth. The resistence with have towards it will merge  ::  Maybe one kind if food that makes you eat slower is spicy food

   SS #54: Existe um jogo (Dota 2) que por causa de ser na minha opiniao o melhor jogo de estrategia com a melhor ideia de heroi possivel (o Meepo) o jogo tornou-se extremamente viciante. Como o jogo é muito complexo, leva muito tempo a aprender... no entanto nao era suposto jogar muito computador porque outras coisas na vida sso precisas fazer e nao devia deixar tempo livre para jogar.... outras coisas que eram precisas era por exemplo progrsmar DRYa ou obras nas casas secundarias, arrumacoes na casa principal... mas com este sutra eu sabia que ao dedicar intensivamente ao jogo, mais depressa passava o vicio. o jogo é muito complexo, e precisa de aquecimento. cada jogo demora cerca de 40 min a acabar, e para comecsr a apanhar o jeito, o primeiro jogo é de aquecimento onde se confirmam as configuracoes e se posiciona melhor a cadeira, se ajustabo som, o cabo de ethernet, etc... e o primeiro jogo é ganho ou perdido por uma questao de sorte porque a cada minuto do jogo é suposto fazer algo especifico em que os primeiros minutos sao os mais decisivos... portanto se nos primeiros minutos o pc nao estiver bem configurado, entao o primeiro jogo é um desperdicio.... ou seja... é mais util jogar 7 jogos de dota seguidos num dia para criar um ambiente imersivo do que jogar 1 jogo a cada 1 dos 7 dias da semana.... se jogasse 1 joga a cada dia da semana, naobdava nem para sentir o sabor do jogo porque alguma coisa ia estar mal configurada, uma vez que o PC tambem nao está a um canto dedicafo so para jogos. o pc é para outros trabalhos e para outras coisas.... como o jogo tem muitas estrategias possiveis e muitas coisas em que pensar, se eu nao jogasse imersivamente nao conseguia experimentar se os meus pensamentos eram validos ou nao... tinha de jogar por longos periodos porque as coisas/estrategias que eu estava a ponsar involviam a cooedenacao motora dos dedo no teclado e no rato. portanto o awuecimento involve ir posicionando os dedos corretamente no teclado.... ou seja.... o vicio do jogo no que respeita a pensar nisso todo o dia, so passou quando experimentei tudo... aí, nao tive eu proprio de decidir parar de jogar e me dedicar a outras coisas tal como programar ou obras, simplesmente o organismo sentiu-se bem e satisfeito e passei a fazer outras coisas, tal como se nao tivesse decidido nada, ou seja, tsl como diz no sutra, eu "actualized it" eu realizei-o. foi realizado.  ::  A minha experiencia de chamar o Diabo/Demonio em casa, numa manha livre em que eu nso tinha aulas da escola quando andava no 10.ano tambem foi assim com a expressso final "actualize this". eu tinhw acordado e fiquei a pensar no sobrenatural e disse em pensamento "se o diabo realmente existir, que me apareca aqui a frente." e para finalizar disse "Conceda!" no sentido "conceda-me essa favor". apartir dessa forte decisao que ate finalizei com uma palavra decisiva, senti como se algo estivesse a viajar a voar de muito longe mas na direcao da minha janela. todas as minhas sensacoes desse deslocamento eu sentia em forma de arrepios que se deslocavam no corpo cono o vento se deslocaria no corpo.... algo se aproximou e vi dento de casa algo a passar a minha frente de cor preta e roxa que se deslocava lentamente a minha frente. de onde isso vinha, sentia arrepios fortes como se de la viesse muuto vento. 

   SS #57: This sutra also exists in the religion of Jesus, celibacy for the priests in the bible is this one sutra. But celibacy in not necessarily for sex. This sutra reveals that the intention of celibacy is to remain still when compultions drag us. Of course, sex is just one of many compultions. Renoucing of the world is also this sutra, because to renouce that which you love is not easy and you will be in a mood where you are compeled to flow in the direction of your desire.

   SS #58: Este sutra e o responsavel por eu em pequenino questionar a existencia das coisas que existiam à minha volta e questionar a minha propria experiencia porque eu qjeria muito saber de que forma é que deus olha paras os justos e para os pecadores. por causa de eu tentar ver o ponto de vista de deus, olhava para a minha existencia como uma possibilidade de ser um teste e nada maia exiatir do que eu e o holograma a minha volta... tornei me mau com aa pessoas a minha volta incluindo com a minha mae... e um certo dia eu estava mais uma vez a querer ser mau com a minha mae e quase para lhe responder: Tu cala-te porque tu nem existes... Da mesma forma o meu professor de fisico-quimica falou de um cientista no passado que quesrionou tudo na vida incluindo ele proprio e eu respondi "Uau que obvio, isso ate eu ja o fiz".

   SS #60: This might be the sutra given by Sadhguru at Inner Engeneering course were he gives a practice to embibe in our personality permanently: Where ever you go, where ever you enter, every rule there is your rule. We can say every rule is my rule."

   SS #63: This is the sutra where I can say "My cat, my guru" because my cat called Buakaw (like the muay thai fighter) climbed on my leg while I was meditating and I relaxed my naked leg to the cats claws.... and pretending the cat was ME, Something in my being swaped and I became the cat's fur. This was with the greay cat to whome I gave paliative care (this cat story may also be the SS #10, I dont know)  ::  I think this is what Alan Watts talks about "the sindrome of the holy man" where a person see all events around himself as if he is doing it all. As if he is GOD. To try it, when listening to somebody's voice, listen as if is is you who are talking and a sincronicity will be such that you cannot distinguish if it is you or not  :: This is what Nithyananda calls "unclutch"... Maybe the best way to practice (the best method I know) is to start in the morning on those days you wake up in bed still tired and you are still going to relax in bed. when such mornings come where younare still going to staybin bed, notice that what prevents you from fallingbasleep again is the chat that is going around in your head.... your head is too chaty and says to much rubish... for now do not try to notice what kind of rubish it actually says (it would be easier now to notice what is trash and what is not because you clearly know that your goal right now is to sleep, and if it is to sleep, most of your daily life thoughts should not apply now, they would not be in alighnment with your current goal which is to sleep. and if your goal is to sleep and you know NOW that your mental chatering is mostly not helping, then NOW you become a a good candidate for this sutra. Pick the sense (from the 5 senses) that is louder, for me usually is the sound sense (because in my vilage house I can hear the birds and the animals though the window very clearly and in my city house I can hear the car and the people very clearly throw the window) and keep attention on those sounds... Stay laying in bed resting, relaxing and now, give more atention to the actually external sounds of the wirld and totally discar the internal sounds.... This sutra actually feels like forcing a certain muscle, unclutching is like a gym where you are trainning to be aware of the external rather the internal that you clearly notice that is rubish. It feels like a gym because your mind will continuously try to shift focus again and again and again to the internal chattering rather the external life sounds, the mind does this continuiusly like a vacum. To fight this vacum feels like exercising on a gym. One thing that allows us to notice the vacum of the mind is when there is a music playing in our head and our attention keeps shifting again and again to it instead of shifting totally to the external sounds.  ::  If you focus 100% your attention to the outside world, you atain te the center of the universe (throw your own point of view) but if keeps focusing on the inner chattering more than the outside, then, at 50% attention a certain bubble starts to form, you become an individual bubble rather then the wide open center of the universe

   SS #64: At the beginning of a sneeze probably shiva is talking about the part where the sneeze bliss is felt.... probably thi tantra is about allowing the most bliss out of a sneeze  ::  This is probably the shiva sutra where in the dance of shiva nataraj is standing on one foot only only, to produce the effect of the chasm (or abiss)  ::  O terror durante a batalha, é esse o ensinamento de Krishna para Arjuna. Arjuna ainda por cima teve de enfrentar a sua propria familia. Mas este sutra diz para nos mantermos conscientes do panico ou da sensacao de fugir de um inimigo "flying in battle"

   SS #66: This sutra makes you go beyond memory. Sadhguru when talking about karma says "...This is my body, why? Because of genetics and because of memory.... if there is memory, I perceive you as my friend, if there is no memory, now I perceive you as a stranger. Memory is a great possibility, without it we would be nothing, and also it is a boundary" (video: https://youtu.be/vLEUBfNf08Q; name: "It’s Your Karma That You Have To Endure Me! | Guru | Occult | Mysticism | Sadhguru | Adiyogi") :: Este sutra é responsavel por uma terapia que se usa em Portugal e que se chama "Constelacoes". Nessa terapia faz-se teatro em que imaginamos que os nossos amigos estao a fazer o papel das pessoas que nos magiaram e a essas pessoas depois podemos reagir como queriamos reagir na altura dos nossos traumas.

   SS #67: Existe a historia de avioes de passangeiros em que as asas tem problemas mecanicos e isso impossibilita de virar á esquerda. A perguntas que sao colocadas sao: o aviao quer virar a esquerda? Sim. O aviao quer virar a direita? Nao. No entanto.... Com "a mudanca consome a mudanca", ou seja, o aviao sempre que queria virar para a esquerda, fazia um giro completo para a direita (ou quase completo) e isso consumia mais combustivel a voar em circulos, mas conseguia virar para a esquerda.  ::   Sometime I ask a question (any kind of question) to a person who is learning a skill, and because such person is learning a skill I ask a question to know if the person gets not only the correct answer but also the shortest with more details. These Shiva Sutras are great answering questions because each word uttered by shiva has a meaning, nothing was left for chance (don't forget that these shiva sutras answer the queations but not with words or intelect, but by making you do something, like beeing aware). When I ask a question to Indratena for example (a friend of mine getting her driving lessons) I remember asking her what the clutch peddal do. She starts answering the answer but not in the priper way, she goes on without focus, like if her mind is not cristal clear, she goes on talking of so many things AROUND the topic like "my friend hits the clutch pedal this way or that way every monday morning". When she starts talking about something else I did not ask, I ask the exact same question again like "Ok, but that is on mondays, what do you what to do every day with the clutch pedal?". This way, I go on and on, either polishing her answers or giving the yoga out of it. What is that one thing that does not include only the monday? Isn't it the "weak"? ("acronomo" is the word in portuguese that describes a name that includes many other names in it's definition. Weak includes 7 day names from Monday to Sunday, so I have to give Indratena the yoga/acronimo out of it to swallow all her options of intelectually running away from the answer I want her to give me. If she says that hitting the clutch on monday is different than Tuesday, then something about the answer is not about cars or vehicles, and by repeating the question, the mind gets focus. So, whenever I am able to give all correct acronimos to all her mental attempts to escape the answer, by repeating the question she gets a cristal clear answer for herself (because she knows she is being tested and if feels like a game, a small pleasent challenge (because my tone of voice is questioning to help, not to repress). All those times I repeat the question she gives a diferent answer, always diferent bits of answers, all bits correct, all bits of answer correspinding to one full question of mine (that sometimes have to be a longer queztion to include acronimos for her attempts tonescape) and in the end. All bits of answers she gives, are merged in the last question in one simple, undersfandable, explicit, answer with all the details. My job is to go questioning the order of her words to match the answer about what the clutch does. So, this sutra shows something fascinating, it shows the algorithm of life like in a rubuks cube. Indratena is experiencing the full algorithm corresponding to the answer, if she keeps rotating the rubiks cube face, the cube (which is solved) gets mixed and in the end solves itself again. Indratena can experince ignorance in life and by rotating thtough the same question, goes to enlightnenment. If after enlightnement (where questions are not needed anymore) if you go again asking questions, ignorance comes again. Example of 1 question for 5 bits of answer: Q: How many numbers does 12345 has? A: It has 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 12, 23, 45, 123, 234, ... , 2345, more combinations and it is only one number 12345 (12 thousand, 345 units). To answer this question about numbers, many many combinations of the same 5 digit sequence can be said, if you attempt to answer all the combinations to annoy the person who is questioning, hopefully you will get bored and come back to your center, to your serious and focused posture. If you are being tested, the more combinations you say, the best we can see if you master the topic or not. If you are tested to be quick in you answer, we can see your clarity about the topic.  :: Computer software use this sutra all the time. When new hardware is built, we get new users, then those new users get the brilliant idea to improve it in creative ways, then because of that, new hardware, the old is forgotten, then sometimes flaws are found and new hardware is built based on the old. By observing any piece of equipment and by using it, you can improve it to the next Step, where "step" is the right word because today all software is built on top of previous software :: Don't be afraid to make mistakes in life, they will give you new data to include in your software. The only thing you need to do is not to forget the happenings, the happenings must also touch the core of your being like a slice of pizza, good memories touch your your memory forever (because they touch your center), so allow bad moments to also touch your center and be with you forever, otherwise yoy repeat the same mistakes. Everything that is not held to you at your center, floats around you eternally creating unpredictability of contact with you. For example, if you do not learn one mistake (not touching your center forever) it may repeat, may not repeat, may repear partially, may not repeat partially. :: It is said that if you read Bagavad Gita 40 times, each time you understand it differently. And it is true for any book that hiys the core of the wheel of change, the deeper the meaning the more you can dilute it afterwards (for example concentrated juice. If it is too concentrated, you can put more and more water unter it gets not too sweet, not too dissolved). In portugal there was a juice SunQuick that was concentrated on purpose and it is meant to dissolve in water, in the end it is still very sweet after dissolving for 40 glasses of juice. Sadhguru sais that there are 3 books where he really really worked on: Book of inmer engeneering, Karma book and Death book, he sais, each time you read them, you get a new meaning :: Maha Vakyas (also translated as: Great truths) have it's meaning rooted in the Alsolute reality, it takes you to the highest. Each time you listen to it sincerely, the maha vakya gets deeper into you. One example of maha vakya is "Aham Brahamasmi" (my identity is the cosmos). You cannot get hurt by these truths because they make you more responsible and competent. Each time you listen to it, you grow from limited identity (individuality) to higher and higher identity (from individuality, to sibling, to family person, to villager, to nationality, to citizen of the world, to citizen of the multiverse, to multiverse itself, to the universe). So this truths, can definitly be called as steps, because every time you step into these maha vakyas, you identity (in this case) goes one step forward, gets one step deeper into you. :: One opportunity to use mahavakyas and to use this technique happens when you are into a relationship. There are things you say to your partner that you trully whant them to absorb. You don't want to repeatedly shout about the same problems, you want you problems between both to be solved, so you can establish a few sheets of paper in the fridge (some place very visible) where you put all those things you said that you do not wa t the other person to forget. Only after the solution written in the paper is fully absorbrd, lived and experienced, only then you can change the paper.... If the person does not get it, change the paper anyway and place it again there after a month in order to be written with diferent moods  :: Provavelmente este shiva sutra esta presente no Inner Engeneering onde o sadhguru diz "Yes and yes to life"  ::  O Jim Carrey tem um filme chamado "Yes Man"

   SS #69: Freedom and bondage are trully trully relative to each other. You know you are in bondage if you experienced freedom in the past (and vice-versa). For example: In Portugal our boss at our job gives us a payout every month as reward to our colaboration. And there are 12 months in the year, so our boss pays us 12 times. But in the month most desired for vacations he pays double. Also in christmas monthhe pays double. So he pays 14 months total in a year. To do so, he lowers our 12 payouts a little bit for us to get used only to that money and in return, the 13th and 14th month paid feels better. It feels like really it is beeing paid double when it isn't. The goal of this is not allowing the employee to live 12 balanced, it creates a little bondage every month for the employee to manage that,and then in the 13th and 14th month, it feels he can have double the economic power, double the economic freedom.

   SS #82: This sutra is mentioned in sadhguru enlightenment story, where at a particular time in is life he spent most of his time with eyes closed to see what was happening internally, it was more intresting inside rather then outside

   SS #83: This sutra was used by mistake/coincidence by Ekart Tolle, he was a trully depressed being and one day he said to himself "I cannot live with myself anymore" And that made him think constantly who is the person to whom he cannot live with

   SS #89: There is a quality in you that happens in all the states of conciousness (which are the things shiva mentions in the sutra to include). This quality is mutual to all the tree states. what is that? If you contemplate on that and realise the answer to that, then that is it, you found the thread that includes all the states (waking, dreaming, sleeping)
   
   SS #70: Bruce lee Being Fast (or SS#28 beeing fast) 
   SS #71: Bruce lee Being Fast (or SS#28 beeing fast)

   SS #71: Nithyananda in the video (listed by Seiva as: '> Part 3: Name: 'Light' As Life Energy; Link: https://youtu.be/oKY8f_PleA4') it is mentioned a certain shock that also happens in the life of Jesus. There is a story in the bible where Jesus in among a huge crowd and a woman who truly wants to visit the master gets inside the crowd. In the middle of such confusion she is able to touch his clothes. The entire crowd was walking along Jesus and feels such energy discharge happening and sais "STOP! Who just touched me?". The crowd was confused about the question and said "many people just touched you, what do you mean??" And the story goes on. The lady was truly wanting to meet the master and the master noticed the shock

   SS #72: Seiva Sais: I don't know if this sutra is sutable for what sadhguru says os not. BUT... If the sutra mentions the living presence of the cosmos, then I think this sutra is sutable for the question to sadhguru about what to do with mountain sized karmas. He's answer about huge amounts of karma was: " -Even if you himalayan size karma, inverse the equation and use this complexity.... instead of passion thowards you and dispassion toward other, no..... total passion about everything else (every other life), total dispassion about this one (refering to ourself)" - Video: With sadhguru in challenging times - day22 Apr"" 

   SS #72: Me, David Santos Rodrigues(who is calling himself Seiva D'arve) had a technique as a kid to experience this sutra: I was very religious with christianity at that time and I heard a priest criticising "Hey, notice that people only remember God and only start praying when they find themselves in some trouble. Why don't you thank God in all sorts of situations and places?" From that moment, When I find myself in any place where the situation is not rotine, when the situation is in some way weird and unexpected, I started feel thankfull for existing is such place and is such condition and for not beeing sick or getting sick despite the current weird situation around me.

   SS #74: In ayahuasca experience, I felt several dimentions crossing themselves and being experienced by me. One dimention crossing another and when in this cosmos when I close one door, in the other side of the universe, one window is open. When I move one arm, in the other side of the universe I moved one leg. I was the universe and I was experiencing the universe as a bunch of connecting lines, connecting chords, where when one thing moves, the counter part that is held to it either by vacum or string, moves... All this was being seen inside my own head, I saw it. This felt king of the experience of Vishnu, Nothing could actually die, things instead of dying, the enter in tight places, filtering themselves and appearing somewhere else. Thing just move themselves to places where they could not be grabed, that is why we don't see the bodies of dead people anymore... They sucumb, they melt and then they flow do lower pressor places. It you includ in your head the vishnu state where all higher pressure places and lower pressure places have a place in your head and are balanced enough for you to see it fully like watching a labirinth from above, then yo see the so called dead stuff actually moving forever. What we cann as death is just the flow of things throw places, throw and across  ::  Do not listen to the logic I am going to use right now, pay attention to the feeling it creates despite the words and logic, I am going to say whatever to kake you feel this: "See as if the entire universe is already creates by you, and then, you decided to rest  and then you decided to forget about it a little, and then, you decided to take notice of your creation only here and there, and then, you are here exactly where you are, and then, all brilliant things that already happened were made by you, and you are the fascinating mind behinfld things. (Alan watts has a speach on this also)

   SS #75: The best compliment you can give to a person is the imitate. This sutra aparently talks about Autenticity, the ability of being our best version... If somebody misbehaves about one of your attitudes that was not pleasent for them and block you from there life, do not immitate this gesture by blocking back, instead, be a permanent light to the world... allow the other perso to go throw yhe rubber band effect and come back or, if the person does not come back, you can still decide to shine some light on their life... This behavious will give you tremendous joy... you will live by joy and autenticity instead of imitation. If somebody slaps you, add the same behaviour to your life only if you find that such attitude would be a joyfull attitude to apply to every body. If you find such attitude pleasent, give a slap back, otherwise, be a light and an example. People who are unaware of joy tend to be imitate. I suggest you imitation only that wich is the best  ::  This might explain the aura of Jesus

   SS #76: Just notice that dhyanalinga (the lingam consecrated at Isha Yoga Center in India, Coimbatore) is a black linga and there is water dripping down the roof exactly at it's center at the top  ::  Notice also that in medieval times, there was a chinese torture method to keep the prisioners without sleep by water dropping down to their forehead.  

   SS #78: It is possible for me to misunderstand this sutra with sutra 13... but I guess this sutra is meant to use when something external "decides" to grab your attention, where 'SS #13' is meant for you to choose a particular point in space. If wad I just said is right... then social media apps is what in my cade robs the most attention out of me (like Instagram and youtube)... And if I am right, I guess this sutra is meant to experience the sensation and feeling that is happening during instagram

   SS #79: No reiki existem exercicios de treino que focam a energia do corpo a focar-se nos pes, depois tornozelos, depois gemeos, depois joelhos, depois perna, depois cintura, etc etc, depois cara, etc etc, tal como no video 2 "Kundalini awakening and DNA ativation
   
   SS #80: Como é que te sentias se por causa de um fogo, perdesses toda a tua familia e todas as pessoas que nao suportas perder? experimenta agir como se tivesses perdido toda a gente até conseguires viver sem elas, depois, aproveita que consegues viver sem elas e tambem aproveita elas proprias. Nao ha sutra melhor para percebermos se estamos a ser um peso ou um fardo para aqueles que cuidam de nos... isto obriga-nos a crescer rumo a independencia e faz com que as pesdoas que cuidam de nos, ganhem mais liberdade na vida, especialmente se nos tiversmos alguma limitacao fisica ou deficiencia
      
   SS #83: It isn't your body that speaks first, it is your mind. Notice that
   
   SS #84: Osho says in his audios "once your eyes are not focuses on the body, you are everywhere." This reminds me of the sensation it is, where in formation in the army, body still and straight, chin poiting up, eyes looking to the infinity.... This sensation of looking to the infinity must be a clue to taste this sutra. So, Osho also sais in the same audio "consciousness is not a space concept". So, What I think Osho is saying is, when your body is not bothering you at all, enjoy either music, or a dance, or a movie, or a family, or a situation so deeply that you forget your body. when you start enjoying something in the world do not exitate in forgeting the body and enjoy it totally. when enjoying the world do not hesitate enjoying, enjoy it so deeply that the body is lost in your perception. When you stop avoiding enjoying the world, each thing and each situation around you can become blissfull, and if the sensation of the body is lost in All of them, then you feel you are everywhere besides the body. When in formation in the army, looking straight into the infinity make you enjoy your current situation  ::  This might happen when drunk, where the skin feels numb due to the alcohol and It is possible to lay down somewhere in the ground, face in the soil and not reslizing the mouth is drooling. In such drool but breathing normally, we might experience ants or other stuff that we never did before.

   SS #85: This can also be the sutra where Nithyananda says: Unclutch

   SS #86: The Nithyananda's video of this is the technique is what makes you move always, each second you are a new person, Therefore this explains the psycdelic trips of fishes with eyes and jesus fishes images, or even the vesica piescis of jesus

   SS #92: Podemos ter opinioes Excelentes, Horriveis e Neutras de cada pessoa. Caso fizessemos um exercicio de experimentarmos estes 3 em toda a gente, entao iriamos sentir o Neutro do Coracao... Experimenta ver quao é horrivel a pessoa que amas, experimenta ver quanto adoravel é a pessoa que odeias, deixa ambos os sentimentos se misturarem e fazer um delicioso "batido de frutas". Quando os sentimentos se misturarem, tornar-se-ao indistinguiveis. O sentimento é tuti fruti, rico... Este exemplo foi dado com pessoas, mas assim serve para tudo  ::  Provavelmemte este é o sutra em que jusus diz "quando alguem te bater numa face, da a outra face" porque isso é uma experiencia que podemos decidir experimwntar antes de acontecer, e se fizermos isso de proposito, enche-nos de orgulho. Esse orgulho deve ser o objetivo do sutra

   SS #93: Provavelmente as bolas de cristal serviam para este efeito, uma pequena bola onde lá aparentava estar desenhado o mundo inteiro numa minuscula bola.

   SS #95: Este sutra tambem pode ser a origem do efeito produzido pela caixa de papel usada nas maquinas fitograficas de "caixas de sapatos". Existem cameras fotograficas feitas com caixas de sapados, onde é feito um furinho com pionés que permite a luz atravessar e marcar a pelicula fotoflgrafica no interior. Este fenomeno do furinho por onde passa a luz pode ser usado por alguma pessoa miupe que tenha dificuldade em ler texto ao longe e que experimente imitar esse furinho usando apenas os dedos da mao. Eu por exemplo, Dv, faco muito uso desse fenomeno, o fenomeno de fechar a mao e recriar um tubo com os dedos, fazendo com que a luz so passe pela minha mao apenas por um unico ponto, e aproveito esse ponto para espreitar por la... Eu como sou miupe tenho dificuldade em ler ao longe, mas usando esta tecnica passo a ler com clareza. Eu aperfeicoei a tecnica para nao ter de fazer um tubo com uma nao imitando um telescopio, em vez disso, uso 3 dedo: o polegar e indicador de uma mao mais o indicador de outra mao, ao juntar os tres dedos faco um furinho em forma de triangulo espremendo bem os tres dedos uns nos outros. Ao fazer isso, vemos que qualquer um desses 3 dedos serve de lente, e cada lente provoca um angulo diferente à chegada de luz aos olhos, tal como o angulo que é aplicado pelos oftalmologistas aos oculos das pessoas que tem astigmatismo. Ou seja, ao aproximar qualquer dedo ao pelo de um olho conseguimos ver uma especie de "nuvem" ou sombra" provocada pela "aresta" da pele do dedo. Ao aproximar um dedo do olho conseguimos ver à sua volta uma zona onde a luz passa distorcida. Essa zona dever ser a zona referida neste shiva sutra, porque ao rodar o dedo no sentido horario (ou ate mesmo no sentido anti horario) conseguimos ver os mais diversos relevos desse dedo a passarem nessa tal zona onde a luz é distorcida. Quando o dedo está perto do olho, a luz desfoca-se à sua volta, possibilitando uma brincadeira: Experimenta olhar fixo para um objeto ao longe fazendo uma linha de visao direta entre o teu olho e esse objeto, agora, experimenta encontrar a distancia certa entre o dedo e o olho de forma a criar esse desfoque, e que esse desfoque seja uma zona à volta do dedo larga o suficiente, agora, esperimenta com esse dedo interromper a linha de visao direta entre o olho e o objeto. Quando isso acontecer, vai paracer que o teu dedo consegue alterar a posicao inicial do objeto apesar de nao lhe estar a tocar.

   SS #99: Distances are veeery relative.... when you feel the distance between your eyes to your feet are close when looking, that is because you did not see the detail, otherwise, if you pay attention, it feels like kilometers. The same ways, the reason why mosques, churches and some temples are built so big, is to make you feel as if you shink of so small you are, experience this "shrink" sensation. A psycdelic experiece is sometimes what huge churches want to acoomplish to your being, the sensasion of vastness where you are small
   
   SS #100: A rudraksha de 5 faces dambem e conhecida por fazer uma "bolha" a nossa volta em o yogi que usa a rudraksha sente-se sempre em casa para onde quer que va, sempre no seu humor subjetivo, sempre no seu cantinho, independente no resto do mundo  ::  Existem mendigos que usam animais pequenos para enganar as pessoas que passam na rua. Fazem criacao de animais e depois pegam em um cao bebe recem-nascido e devam-no no colo ou no ombro a passear. Caso o cao tenha fome isso nota-se nos olhos e no comportamente, e isso provoca tristeza e compaixao as pessoas que vao a passar, dando assim uma esmola... Sempre que sabemos que esse negocion acontece, é nos possivel manter no nosso humor subsjetivo (no humor que tinhamos antes de nos cruzarmos com essas pessoas) e assim nao ser enganados por esse negocio... porque quanto menos comida o mendigo der comida ao cao, mais lucra

   SS #101: Seiva translates this sutra as: "Believe omniscient, omnipotent, permeating, perculating everywhere.." And when we deal with dumb people from the village, we feel the lack of knowing from them, like if inteligence is not yet reaching it's depts.... Another way of seeing this dumb people with stone like brains is to see that their rock like brain is a building block for a bigger scale of "small" particles that we, the observer, cannot yet step in because we are too thin for this rock like scale  ::  Este é o shiva sutra de ser auspicioso, porque se imaginares que toda a gente ignorante seja deus por tras a fazer-se de tolo e a viver de forma boemia, entao vais perder a preocupacao de te afastar dessa gente. Se tudo à tua volta estiver certo, nao vais ter problemas de exprimentar viver as coisas"  ::  No comboio um outro passangeiro por acaso calhou reparar nonmeu anel da isha por ser invulgar, mas nao disse nada, eu é que simplesmente reparei que ele estava a reparar. Entao, se ele estivesse a par deste sutra, ia querer entrar mais a fundo na historia por tras deste anel  ::  Jesus fala deste sutra no momento em que diz que Deus esta sempre a observar-te. Foi me ensinado na catequese que Independentemente do local onde nos cometemos erros e fazemos asneiras, nem que seja num lugar escuro, escondido e distante, estamos sempre a ser observados por deus. Ou seja, o sutra pratica-se imaginando constantemente que estamos a ser observados por alguem. Se isso acontecer, nos proprios nos corrigimos a nos mesmos. Ou seja, imagina que alguem fascinante passa por ti na rua e tu gostavas de ser como ele; saber falar bem; saber vestir bem; saber correr bem; saber defender-se bem etc (deus em todos os aspetos, porque tudo o que ele tem, sabe-te bem) entao, sempre que ele te der um ensinamento para tu lentamente e diariamente ires praticando, entao, imagina que ele esta sempre ao teu lado e nao te deixa entrar na preguica. E porque é que é preciso acreditar que ele esta sempre a observar? porque se nao tivesse realmente a observar, nao ias te esforcar para atingir menos dores do que agora e mais alegrias do que agora. Alem disso, ha pessoas fascinantes dessas que assim que entam no nosso campo visual, nos endireitamo-nos logo e fazemos tudinho para lhes agradar e parecer-lhes bem..... Imagina ppr exemplo que a tua mais doce amada, a miuda pir quem es fascinado é Deus (à qual tu queres sempre parecer bem). Entao imagina na tua privacidade e habitua-te realmente a parecer bem.... Depois desse habito, outros virao... Mas habitua-te primeiro a algum bom habito usando este metodo.  ::  Pervading nao é "Omnipresente"?

   SS #102: Imagine is GOD can see you and your mistake even if you hide. Like if you steal a bottle of wine and go hide in a barn... Even if nobody knows, imagine that GOD (spirit) knows

   SS #103: Sera que este sutra se refere a pratica de observar sempre que mudamos de ideias? quer as que escolhemos, quer as involuntarias?

   SS #104: Whatever you are experiencing right now visually and with every other sense, take a snapshot of it and keep it until you absorb everything   ::  Do not limit yourself, do not divide time into days, months, seconds... the moment you call "a wave" remember it is not a wave, it is the ocean. If you do not remember, you are limited  :: This sutra may be the same as my botany with salvia divinorum, where every face of every furniture is infite, the edges are make by us, if you look paralel to it enough, then we can see the remaining of the texture continuing after the edge fo infinite distances. The effect is the same as looking under a closed door, the ground continies before and after the door, if you look close enought to the ground and if the door gap is big enough, you can see under it  ::  Nithyananda says that human mind is like a broken mirror where the same sun ray if reflecting so many times in itself by itself  ::  there is a very nice photography trick, to photo shoot an entire city with clarity, but by using the reflection on a few centimiters of water on the urban floor. Also there is a marketing trick to show how a mechanic cleaned a car very very well that its painting is shinning, but then the camera zooms back and it what actually shooting from the reflection of another even better cleaned and polished car  ::  In the sutra, "Shakty" is mentioned, it means that innorder to experience this sutra, we may have to "dance" or "wave" round the limited objects or limites perceptions  ::  This sutra is the sutra that make a pencil bend when held in two fingers (but not in the middle, we must pinch the pencil with 2 fingers but NOT on the center of mass). By waving the hand, the pencil seems to bend like rubber ::  This may be the sutra of hatha yoga

   SS #105: This may the 1 of the 7 hermetical priciples, where "The universe is mental"

   SS #106: Sadhguru explains this sutra in inner engeneering as: "I am responsible for everything". Seiva Says: this is the sutra for marriage without burocracy wich is the true marriage :: This is the reason Seiva is with his consort, not because he needs, but because Isaura is beeing treted has him. He left concern for himself and took care of her.

   SS #107: Doesn't the sutra mean that everything is an "eye" of consciousness? each being is this consciousness, right? isn't each vertice of each object one point of consciousness? (just like one of my salvia trips where the wall had eyes)

   SS #108: The TAO, Wu-Wei is the allowance of the individual for the body to freely float along the river... if you leave your body to float with the river, you experience one level of Wu-wei, the TAO... the same way... if you perceive your body's tendencies and routines as if you are simply watching a log of a tree floating along the path of least resistence, now, you see the spirit of guidance... Osho describes in his experience of enlightenment "I felt the power of God, I was not there, God was there... and I went at 1 am in yhr night to a garden where I used to go and I climbed the gate as a thief, I had to do it, I was nit there, God was there". (Osho Words are not those exactly, please watch: https://youtu.be/oqXYUiWVlkU)

   SS #109: Salvia divinorum gives you this one

   SS #110: Jesus disse: Venham a mim as criancinhas

   SS #111: Quando eu era mais novo, meditava em qual seria a sensacao de ter visao apartir de um sitio que eu desconhecia visao, por exemplo, qual é a sensaçao de ver apartir de um joelho. esse membro nunca teve visao e é dificil imaginar visao la.

   SS #112: This sutra describes what Nithyananda calls "Kailash"  ::  Another place where this sutra was usefull to me was, when talking to a person whose intelect is limited, and when he got into divorce and big problems, he kept his trust in me while repeating his problems on the phone over and over and over and over again, due to lack of know-how to solve it, he kept saying the same things and asking me "do you understand, do you understand?". This person had a huge dificulty to listen to me also, so I must wait and wait and wait for him to listen to me without cutting my words... I felt like hanging, waiting... this sutra in a way told me to puropusly do it... His speach swallows my whole time also, nothing of value comes from these calls, so I hang there, just hanging with him on the phone like if we were some how in the same room... ::  When playing in a swing set (baloico)  ::  When travelong by car and the car goes uphill and finds the top of it with speed, then goes down hill... When going downhill, sometimes the speed matches the weight of the car and we feel a certain bliss emerging up from the belly first, a certain bliss when the car feels like going mid air. The speed nulifies the gravity for a moment. This is also mentioned in the movie "free guy" in the swing set scene ::  There are experiments where an airplane cancels gravity by flying down at the same speed as the gravity, and people inside it can temporarily experience lack of gravity and play.  ::  Trampolins provocam o mesmo efeito que os baloiços, também dao a sensacao do espaco

}

SS #2 {
   - Nithyananda sais in the video that one of Shiva's qualities is "Asudosha", what ever the society rejects, Shiva accepts, he is pleased with very small things
}

Shiva Sutra #7 {
   > With intangible breath in center of forehead, as this reaches the heart at the moment of sleep, have direction over dreams and over death itself.

   video by Nithyananda: "Shiva Sutras Death Demystified" (https://youtu.be/beqUPL4Y2tg)

   - This sutra explains perfectly what by mistake, Seiva experienced at the hospital during army burnout. He tried this sutra during the night and he experienced the death state, he experienced 2 realities at the same time

   Nithyananda: "prana means air energy"
   
   Seiva: something to try: did you ever see a kid trying to sleep sitting down with its head straight? and starting to hit the wall with the head over and over and over? Well: at the moment where you feel so sleepy that your neck starts to wave like a snake, do the sutra. At that moment, head is free falling... stopping... free falling... stopping... yin... yang... yin... yang... ... KEEP YOUR REMAINING wakefull attention in such free fall
   Seiva: If you learn to fall asleep by listening to the heart (you can even use noise supressors in the ears) you MAY fall in tune with this sutra... AND if you fall in tune with the idea that is YOU beating the heart, then you can calm it down, you can beat faster and you can stop it completly to atain a conscious maha samadhi

   Nithyananda ecplains why spiritual people are called as "reborn" or "borned again" just like jesus said. He explains in his video at min (40:30)
 }

shiva Sutra #16 {
   Nithyananda explains Pratyahara Shambavi Mudra and Sadhana in this video
   evaluate: "$ ss links" to see the link 16 of this video
}

shiva Sutra #17 {

   Nithyananda YouTube video {
      Nithyananda, while explaining SS #17, explains "this moment is inevitable" as taught by Sadhguru in inner engeneering and shambavi
      "The moment you acept you, there won't be any thought"
      Youtube Video: "Catch the thread of existence - Shiva Sutras" (https://youtu.be/c06CTQJfC74)
   }
}

Shiva Sutra #20 {
   Seiva says: Fill the whole car like a statue, still, if you keep you center of mass in line between a strong base and a light head, experience. When you cook bread and you swirl the bread around the container with a certain amount of flour, the uncooked bread can experience the same as you. For the second part of the sutra, you can watch toy story movie at the part where Jessie introduces woody. The woodie's walk with style is an example: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wbkojrVKj-s
   seiva says: "in a stil vehicle, in slowing invisible circles" I think it means that the vehicle must have springs yo bounce a little bit
   
   Seiva says: Vivekananda got enlightened by his guru with this technique: the guru asked if the had the courage to sit. vivekanada sat and the guru put one feet one his chest. by rithmically swaying him, the experience. video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pviWGX7bLF4
}
Shiva Sutra #25 {
   Nithyananda sais at the video "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eq0V-seTR2I": "Patanjali says: Just sit straight and you will enter into meditation"

   Sadhguru tells the story how Ashtavakra Enlightened the king Janaka: "https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=24HmHvT6M04" (when comming down the horse, stoped at one leg up, one leg down)
   
   # uDev: Create a script at home stereo system: Randomly whistle a sound. The moment you listen to the sound, you must STOP completly without adjusting! (Just like Nithyananda told in his video). Sugestion for sound: rattle snake sound
   
}

Shiva Sutra #28 {

   Nithyananda YouTube video: He says that the sutra itself how it is presented in this list, is a commantary of an enlightened master Abhinavagupta at the 9th century and the sanskrit translation of the sutra is: "Having meditated on the gross and weak shakti in "vada sha endrias" (12 endrias) thus making it subtle, one who enters the heart space and meditates there attains mukti, becomes liberated and takes a quantum jump into ultimate consciousness"
   video from nithyananda: https://youtu.be/ouo1k3mtJRA
}  

Shiva Sutra #83 {
   Nithyananda YouTube video {
      Nithyananda explains something that mooji also explains: Keep every tought aside and see what remains
   }
}

ss 49 {
   - One example of shaken senses is: tapping and untapping your ears like morse code as many people do as a kid
}

SS 91 {
   Nithyananda talks about mariage and divorce in this video acording to india
}
Osho Audios {
   Link: https://oshoworld.com/vigyan-bhairav-tantra-vol-1-01-40/
}

-- Nithyananda says that you cannot separate the master from his experience. If you try to have the experience of the master and reject part of his way of life, the you are in trouble... a master is anybody who can reproduce his experience, so if you follow a master and you want to experience his experience, then you should not reject any aspect of his being... Shiva cannot be separated from shiva sutras, he was teaching them while he was at that moment experiencing them. (That also defines a master, because false masters tell you to practice or do things that they themselves do not do. So, if such practice was so important how is that, that such so called "masters" did not yet strive to embibe and live that way? At this point you distinguish from opinion to mastery). If you do not reject any aspect of shiva's way of life, you may experience the full shiva sutras (so what are his qualities?? how did he dress for each ocasion? try that)... So if you try to behave like shiva in order to experience his experience of life, then there are something else I would like to notice. Sadhguru said that Shiva did not spill is seed, his sperm, because it is used to reach the peak of consciousness... The fundamental vital energy in the system, instead of spilling it, letting it go in a physical manner which would lead to reproduction, he used the same energy to reach the peak of consciousness. He spilled from the top of his head. When a human being is not involved in the reproductive process, naturally his attachment to the body is very minimal. Once his attachment to the body is very minimal, the sense of fear does not exist. When there is no fear, he is naturaly a valiant. That is the consequence of this. (Youtube video where sadhguru tells this: https://youtu.be/G6anZKkPOYM) - Seiva D'Arve
-- Sadhguru sais that these shiva sutras were transpired between 2 people with utmost intimacy, not in terms of sexuality, it means that there was no resustance between the two. Devi was open to whay is being offered. Video: https://youtube.com/shorts/FgBjInkwopA?feature=share






- 6 - If you want to lay eggs around the world, writting each sutra around where you live, where would you place these reminders? Where would we right this numbers of these sutras in front of our eyes for everyday rememberance? > 
Places to drop reminders { 

   SS #13: Usaria uma pilha de relogio ou uma anilha para a colocar no chão a refletir luz do sol para que pudesse olhar para ela

   SS #21: My car, passenger seat

   SS #58: On top of a buildind with view for the crowd

}
