Vigyan Bhairav Tantra (Technique: 036 of 112) explained by Osho

Shiva Replied:  
   36. Look upon some object, then slowly withdraw your sight from it, then slowly withdraw your thought from it. then.
---------------------------------------------------------------

Look upon some object. Look at a flower, but remember what that LOOK means. Look! Do not think. I need not repeat it. Always remember that look means: look, do not think. If you think, it is not a look; then you have contaminated everything. It must be a pure look, a simple look.

LOOK UPON SOME OBJECT. Look at a flower,- a roseflower. THEN SLOWLY WITHDRAW YOUR SIGHT FROM IT – very slowly. The flower is there — first look at it. Drop thinking; go on looking. When you feel that now there is no thought, simply the flower is there in your mind, nothing else, now slightly move your eyes away. By and by the flower recedes, goes out of focus, but the image will remain with you. The object will have gone out of focus; you will have turned your look away. The image, the outer flower is no more there, but it is reflected – reflected in your mirror of consciousness. It will be there! THEN SLOWLY WITHDRAW YOUR SIGHT FROM IT, THEN SLOWLY WITHDRAW YOUR THOUGHT FROM IT.

So first, withdraw from the outer object. Then only the inner image remains – the thought of the roseflower. Now withdraw that thought also. This is very difficult, the second part, but if the first part is done exactly as it is said, it will not be so difficult. First withdraw your mind from the object, your sight. Then close your eyes, and just as you have removed your eyesight from the object, remove yourself from the image. Withdraw yourself; become indifferent. Do not look at it inside, just feel that you have gone away from it. Soon the image will also disappear.

First the object disappears, then the image disappears. And when the image disappears, Shiva says, THEN. Then you are left alone. In that aloneness one realizes oneself, one comes to the center, one is thrown to the original source.

This is a very good meditation — you can do it. Take any object, but let the object remain the same every day so that the same image is created inside and you remove yourself from the same image. Images in the temples were used for this technique.Now images are there, but the technique is lost. You go to a temple — this is the technique to do. Look at the statue of Mahavir or Buddha or Ram or Krishna or any other. Look at the statue, concentrate on it; focus the whole mind so that the statue becomes an image inside. Then close your eyes. Remove your eyes from the statue, then close them. And then remove the image, wipe it out completely.

Then you are there in your total aloneness, in your total purity, in your total innocence. Realizing that is freedom, realizing that is truth.
