Vigyan Bhairav Tantra (Technique: 012 of 112) explained by Osho

Shiva Replied: 
   12. When on a bed or a seat, let yourself become weightless, beyond mind.
---------------------------------------------------------------

You are sitting here. Just feel that you have become weightless, there is no weight. You will feel that somewhere or other there is weight, but go on feeling the weightlessness. It comes. A moment comes when you feel that you are weightless, that there is no weight.

When there is no weight you are no more a body, because the weight is of the body — not of you. You are weightless. That is why there were so many experiments done. Someone is dying… many scientists all over the world have tried to weigh the person.

If there is a slight difference, if when a man is alive the weight is more and when a man is dead the weight is less, then scientists can say that something has moved from the body, that a soul or the self or something that was there is no more — because for science nothing can be weightless, nothing! Weight is basic to all matter.

Even sunrays have weight. It is very, very slight, minute, and they are difficult to weigh, but scientists have weighed them. If you can collect all the sunrays on a five-square-mile plot of ground, their weight will be similar to that of a hair. But sunrays do have weight; they have been weighed. Nothing can be weightless for science. And if something can be weightless then it is immaterial, it cannot be matter.

And science has believed for these twenty or twenty-five years that there is nothing except matter. So when a man dies, if something leaves the body the weight must differ. But it never differs; the weight remains the same. Sometimes it even becomes more — that is the problem. The alive man weighs less; the dead man becomes more weighty. That created new problems, because they were really trying to find out if some weight is lost; then they can say something has left.

But it seems that, on the contrary, something has come in. What has happened? Weight is material, but you are not a weight. You are immaterial. If you try this technique of weightlessness, you just have to conceive of yourself as weightless — and not only conceive, but feel that your body has become weightless. If you go on feeling, feeling, feeling, a moment comes when suddenly you realize that you are weightless. You are already, so you can realize it anytime.

You have only to create a situation in which you can feel again that you are weightless. You have to dehypnotize yourself. This is the hypnosis, the belief that “I am a body and that is why I feel weight.” If you can dehypnotize yourself into realizing that you are not a body, you will not feel weight. And when you do not feel weight you are beyond mind, says Shiva: When on a bed or a seat, let yourself become weightless, beyond mind. . Then the thing can happen.

The mind also has weight; everyone’s mind has a different weight. At one time there were some proposals that the weightier the mind, the more intelligent. And generally it is true, but not absolutely, because sometimes very great men had very small minds, and sometimes some stupid idiot’s mind weighed very much. But generally it is true, because when you have a bigger mechanism of the mind it weighs more. The mind is also a weight, but your consciousness is weightless. To feel this consciousness, you have to feel weightlessness.

So try it: walking, sitting, sleeping, you can try it. Some observations…. Why does the dead body become more weighty sometimes? Because the moment the consciousness leaves the body, the body becomes unprotected. Many things can enter it immediately. They were not entering because of you. Many vibrations can enter into a dead body — they cannot enter into you. You are there, the body is alive, resistant to many things.

That is why once you are ill, it begins to be a long sequence; one illness, then another, and then another — because once you are ill you become unprotected, vulnerable, non-resistant. Then anything can enter into you. Your presence protects the body. So sometimes a dead body can gain weight. The moment you leave it, anything can enter into the body. Secondly, when you are happy you always feel weightless; when you are sad you always feel more weight, as if something is pulling you down. The gravitation becomes much more.

When you are sad, you are more weighty. When you are happy, you are light. You feel it. Why? Because when you are happy, whenever you feel a blissful moment, you forget the body completely. When you are sad, suffering, you cannot forget the body, you feel the weight of it. It pulls you down — down to the earth, as if you are rooted. Then you cannot move; you have roots in the earth. In happiness you are weightless. In sorrow, sadness, you become weighty. In deep meditation, when you forget your body completely, you can levitate. Even the body can go up with you. It happens many times.

Scientists have been observing one woman in Bolivia. While meditating she goes up four feet, and now it has been observed scientifically; many films have been taken, many photographs. Before thousands and thousands of observers suddenly the woman goes up and gravity becomes nil, nullified. As of yet there is no explanation for what is happening, but that same woman cannot go up while not in meditation. And if her meditation is disturbed, suddenly she falls down. What happens? Deep in meditation you forget your body completely, and the identification is broken. The body is a very small thing; you are very big, you have infinite power.

The body has nothing in comparison to you. It is as if an emperor has become identified with his slave, so as the slave goes begging, the emperor goes begging; as the slave weeps, the emperor weeps. When the slave says, “I am no one,” the emperor says, “I am no one.” Once the emperor recognizes his own being, once he recognizes that he is the emperor and this man is just a slave, everything will change suddenly. You are infinite power identified with a very finite body. Once you realize your self, then weightlessness becomes more and the weight of the body less. Then you can levitate, the body can go up.

There are many, many stories which cannot yet be proven scientifically, but they will be proven… because if one woman can go up four feet, then there is no barrier. Another can go a thousand feet, another can go completely into the cosmos. Theoretically there is no problem: four feet or four hundred feet or four thousand feet, it makes no difference. There are stories about Ram and about many others who have disappeared completely with the body.

Their bodies were never found dead on this earth. Mohammed disappeared completely — not only with his body; it is said he disappeared with his horse also. These stories look impossible, they look mythological, but they are not necessarily so. Once you know the weightless force, you have become the master of gravity. You can use it; it depends on you. You can disappear completely with your body. But to us weightlessness will be a problem.

The technique of SIDDHASAN, the way Buddha sits, is the best way to be weightless. Sit on the earth — not on any chair or anything, but just on the floor. And it is good if the floor is not of cement or anything artificial. Just sit on the ground so that you are the nearest to nature. It is good if you can sit naked. Just sit naked on the ground in the Buddha posture, siddhasan — because siddhasan is the best posture in which to be weightless. Why? Because you feel more weight if your body is leaning this way or that way.

Then your body has more area to be affected by gravity. If I am sitting on this chair then a greater area of my body is affected by gravity. While you are standing less area is affected, but you cannot stand for too long. Mahavir always meditated standing — always, because then one covers the least area. Just your feet are touching the ground. When you are standing on your feet, straight, the least amount of gravity works on you — and gravity is weight.

Sitting in a Buddha posture, locked — your legs are locked, your hands are locked — also helps, because then your inner electricity becomes a circuit. Let your spine be straight. Now you can understand why so much emphasis has been given to a straight spine, because with a straight spine less and less area is covered, so gravity affects you less. With closed eyes, balance yourself completely, center yourself.

Lean to the right and feel the gravity; lean to the left and feel the gravity; lean forward and feel the gravity; lean backward and feel the gravity. Then find the center where the least pull of gravity is felt, the least weight is felt, and remain there. Then forget the body and feel that you are not weight — you are weightless. Then go on feeling this weightlessness. Suddenly you become weightless; suddenly you are not the body; suddenly you are in a different world of bodilessness. Weightlessness is bodilessness. Then you transcend mind also. Mind is also part of the body, part of matter. Matter has weight; you do not have any weight. This is the basis of this technique. Try any technique, but stick to it for a few days so that you can feel whether it is working or not.
